To stabilize the level of production and improve the efficiency of development, well stimulation procedures (WSP) are carried out.
Well stimulation procedure is a set of geological, technological, technical and economic measures aimed on implementing of the project solutions in order to maximize hydrocarbon production and obtain additional profit from the subsoil user.
WSP are conducted with increasing productivity or repairing of surface and subsurface equipment. Well shutdown, gas flow control, commissioning must be carried out only by the operator
Planning of WSP is carried out by the engineering and geological service of the oil and gas producing companies.
Thus, the process of selection of wells for WSP at a late stage of development is a very important issue. To increase the reliability and success of the implemented measures, it is necessary to conduct a comprehensive analysis of the following parameters:
• Mobile oil reserves (taking into account geological heterogeneity);
• Current reservoir parameters;
• Technical operation of the well;
• Analysis of the efficiency of the carried out WSP.
Therefore, the primary goal of this work is to optimize the process of selection of well-candidates for WSP, applying modern methods and technologies - machine learning, neural network programming and the creation of expert systems.
Introduction
	The purpose of the system is to improve selection and planning processes of remedial stimulation for an oil well. To achieve this goal, the following tasks have been set:
1.	 Analysis of the existing methods and algorithms for selection process of well-candidates.
2.	Detailed study of the oil field properties and development history.
3.	Evaluation of the current development scheme and well condition.
4.	Analysis of history of carried out remedial stimulation: reasons and purposes, success and failure rate.
5.	Selection of most effective remedial stimulation operations for further evaluation.
6.	Pre-estimation of the efficiency of remedial stimulation.
7.	Grading of well-candidates, according to current production profile and well condition.
8.	Development of remedial stimulation design according to well structure.
9.	Creation of a set of criteria for selection of well-candidates for remedial stimulation.
10.	 Development and testing of the expert system.
11.	 Analysis and optimization of the expert system.
Main issues are connected with uncertainties of development and remedial stimulation history. In case of failure the evaluation of its reasons should be carried out for better evaluation of remedial stimulation design. For example, in case of terrigenous reservoir acidizing is not so effective as hydraulic fracturing. 
Furthermore, estimation of received production rates and evaluation of the economic efficiency must be carried out to confirm the necessity of remedial stimulation.
Discription of applied algorithm
Cluster analysis is designed to break up a set of objects (well stock) into homogeneous groups (clusters) so that differences between groups are maximized, and within the group between objects - minimal. In this paper, a group of wells is divided into clusters.
For the wells of each cluster, a certain algorithm of actions for the selection of well stimulation procedures is created. This makes it possible to greatly simplify and accelerate the work of a specialist of the geological service to select the necessary well stimulation procedures in the well. As the method of clustering, the k-Nearest Neighbor, best known and adapted for a wide range of problems, was chosen. The criteria for clustering are the numerical values of the selected geological parameters of the well. Cluster analysis has a number of important advantages over the classical method of statistical data analysis:
- allows to consider large data arrays, compress them, make them compact;
- makes it possible to split data sets into groups not by one attribute, but by typing them;
- has no limitations on the type of source data, dimension and size of parameters.
However, there are a number of limitations, due to which at this stage, cluster analysis for data processing can not be fully implemented.
One of the main limitations is the error / non-certainty of the initial data. Along with the problem of the quality of the initial data, the automatic choice of the boundary values of the given geological criteria causes certain difficulties: in one case, high water cut can be chosen by the algorithm at 90%, in another - at a level of 50%.
To make the clustering method more resistant to the above-mentioned factors, separate elements of the theory of fuzzy sets is used.
In the classical theory of fuzzy sets, the membership of elements in a set is estimated in binary terms in accordance with a clear condition: the element either belongs to or does not belong to a given set. Thus, any geological parameter (permeability, effective formation thickness, reservoir pressure, etc.) can only be large or small, the classical set theory does not provide intermediate conditions. This creates great limitations when considering well-candidates for wells stimulation procedures. For example, one of the most important parameters is the oil-saturated thickness.
Promising for the implementation of well stimulation procedures is that wells should have a large oil-saturated thickness. However, there are questions to the very boundary value of the parameter, from which the oil-saturated thickness is considered to be "large" and it is possible to consider the wells as promising for carrying out well stimulation procedures.
In the theory of fuzzy sets, the main role is played by the membership function ? (x), which determines the degree of belonging of each element to the fuzzy set under consideration. The boundary between "belongs" and "does not belong" is erased. There is a possibility of refusing clear limitations in the definition of boundary values, due to which the cluster's clustering algorithm becomes more stable. Using the theory of fuzzy sets, there is a continuous evaluation of the degree of belonging of the selected geological parameter to the fuzzy set. For example, oil saturated thickness equal to 14 m, belongs to the "big" oil-saturated thickness of 0,3;16 m - by 0,6. The form of the membership function is initially determined by the expert method: for positively influencing parameters (oil-saturated thickness, permeability, porosity, etc.) the dependence ? (x) has an increasing form, for the negative influences (depression, productivity, water cut, etc.) - decreasing. That the basic requirement for clusterization is fulfilled: the maximum differences between a certain complex parameter between clusters and the minimum ones within clusters.
Results of the applied algorithm
As initial data, the values of the geological parameters of the operation of wells of a high degree of reliability are used. The method of expert evaluations excludes non-influencing parameters that have little influence on the flow rate (oil viscosity, gas factor, etc.). A high degree of change in some parameters over time has determined the need to automate the process of uploading data from the database. Downloading and processing of data occurs in the MS Excel software environment. Clustering of data is carried out in a Python 3.6.2 © Sofrware. 
In order to prove difference between clusters, an average values of each parameter are presented in Table 1 below. As can be seen from Table 1, there is a pronounced difference between each cluster in all parameters.

Cluster	Vres, 103 m3	So, %	k, mD	H, m
1	373,66	0,65	53,27	14,42
2	289,89	0,62	31,54	13,00
3	200,86	0,61	8,55	9,26

But this algorithm has some uncertainty of the results. The results of clustering process are presented in Figure 1. 
As can be seen, wells 30p and 102 could be included in Cluster 2, but they have a high value of reservoir properties. On the other hand, well 186 could be included in Cluster 1, but it has worth reservoir properties, than wells from this Cluster. 
Finally, wells 194 and 132 have high values of remaining oil in place, so they could be included in cluster 1. But in this process, the complex parameter was used, so wells clusters cannot be identified only by a single parameter. Error rate is equal 6 percent.

 
Figure 1. Analysis of clustering process.

The clustering analysis was done in order to separate “good” wells from “bad” wells. As can be seen from the Table 1, Cluster ¹1 supposed to include wells, which are the first one to be chosen for well stimulation procedures.
To create a learning sample a decision tree was chosen due to following reasons:
•	Number of parameters 
•	Different types of WSP
A decision tree is a decision support tool that uses a tree-like graph or model of decisions and their possible consequences, including chance event outcomes, resource costs, and utility. It is one way to display an algorithm.
The main advantage of the decision tree is that the system can independently identify the significance of each parameter. The result is presented in Figure 2 below.
 
Figure 2. Weight of each parameter

The following results were obtained:
•	Oil production rate – 0,37
•	Liquid production rate – 0,36
•	Formation pressure – 0,16
•	Water cut – 0,08
•	Mass of proppant – 0,03 
Mass of proppant was chosen as the additive parameter to show the least impact providing on the decision tree.
So, after clustering analysis of the wells the following results for each learning sample were obtained:
•	2  wells for Cluster 1
•	10 wells for cluster 2
•	12 wells for Cluster 3
As it was mentioned above, the analysis would be conducted only for Cluster 1. Only 2 wells take part in the teaching sample in Cluster 1. It proves the high quality of wells in this Cluster not only due to geological, but also on the basis of technical parameter. In Figure 3 below oil production rates for last6 month till current moment for wells from Cluster 1 are presented.
 
Figure 3. Oil production rates of wells from Cluster 1
There was pointed out an area in red, which consists of wells with low values of production wells and the expert system added for these wells following well stimulation procedures:
?	32ð – squeeze cementing;
?	158, 406, 168, 142 – hydraulic fracturing .
Current operating parameters of each well are presented in Table 2 below.

Table 2. Wells recommended for WSP.
¹ Well	Qoil, t/day	Qliq, m3/day	Pform, atm	Water cut, %
32ð	0,00	67,65	170,1 	100,00
158	12,00	50,45	147,26 	69,96
142	2,40	49,01	134,28 	93,82
168	17,70	25,92	184,17 	2,91
406	8,20	103,30	168,12 	89,98

	Analyzing following results it can be supposed, that in well ¹142 – squeeze cementing is better WSP than hydraulic fracturing, due to high level of water cut.
	As can be seen, all wells with low production rates are influenced by water production. In this case analysis of nature of water influx should be done.
Conclusions
Participation of a person in this process – loading of initial data and introduction of several additional parameters. The rest of the work is done by the system itself.
Thus, in this paper, the following data was analyzed and analyzed:
• Reservoir properties ;
• The history of development from the beginning of operation to the current time;
• Detailed study of the history of the WSP;
• Selection of the most effective WSP;
• Evaluation of the effectiveness of the proposed WSP;
Based on these data, the expert system  that includes a data clustering algorithm and independent training for each resulting cluster was build.
Undoubtedly, there is some degree of inaccuracy of the initial data, therefore, in order to optimize the operation of the system, it is necessary to increase the amount of input data and their quality.
 BREAKS HERE
The main purpose during operating of oil fields is maintenance of oil production in order to maximize the period of cost-effective development.  One of the basic methods for achieving that goal is performance of hydraulic fracturing (HF) treatment on existing wells. The correct selection of a candidate well for the hydraulic fracturing can provide successful implementation of maintenance of oil production. In most Russian and foreign oil and gas oil companies, the task of selection of a candidate well for HF is handled manually or with partial automation of some calculations. So the development of methods and algorithms for operational solution of the described task remains challenging.
The purpose of the work is the development of methodology for the operational selection of wells for hydraulic fracturing treatment based on machine learning for Field A.  For achieving the described goal following steps were done. In order to prepare information for machine learning the data from the simulation model, monthly field reports, well test, HF reports are collected and analyzed. Principal component analysis was used in order to find out correlating between themselves parameters and exclude them from the database. Target for binary classification parameter is efficiency of HF treatment. 
  After the final database has been formed, machine learning process was realized. Six different models of machine learning were trained and evaluated: k-neighbors, support vector method, decision tree, random forest, gradient boosting, neural network. Comparison of models was carried out and best classification model was selected on base of several independent metrics. The parameters most influencing on the result of the success of the HF were identified. Machine learning model based on neural networks has been trained to estimate the average annual oil production rate after HF treatment. Based on the selected model, predictions are made for the remaining wells not participating in the training. Well candidates for HF treatment were proposed. Economic efficiency was estimated.

Introduction
The main purpose during operating of oil fields is maintenance of oil production in order to maximize the period of cost-effective development.  One of the basic methods for achieving that goal is performance of hydraulic fracturing (HF) treatment on existing wells. The correct selection of a candidate well for the hydraulic fracturing can provide successful implementation of maintenance of oil production. In most Russian and foreign oil and gas oil companies, the task of selection of a candidate well for HF is handled manually or with partial automation of some calculations. So the development of methods and algorithms for operational solution of the described task remains challenging.
Since many parameters affect the success of hydraulic fracturing treatment, the application of standard statistical indicators and calculations may be controversial and limited. However, with the development of computer technology and the corresponding mathematical apparatus, processing of large database became possible. 
Machine learning is a set of methods for discovering previously unknown, non-trivial and practically useful information, which will be necessary for decision-making in various areas of human activity. Recently, these methods are increasingly finding their application in various areas of the oil field development.
In the process of field development, decisions on the application of different production stimulation treatments are taken on the basis of operational data coming from wells. Unfortunately, the quality of these data does not always allow for a correct analysis: there may be no information for certain time intervals, some measurements do not always correspond to a physical model or do not correlate with each other. The presence of incorrect data in the reports can be caused both by a malfunction in the operation of the measuring equipment or by the "human factor". It is not always possible to determine the error, and incorrect information can lead to incorrect conclusions about the current state of the wells and the field as a whole, as a result of which incorrect decisions can be made to select of oil production treatment.
The application of the machine learning methods makes it possible to process huge data sets (Big Data), to reveal new patterns and to take them into account in future for forecasting, to define missing values. As a result, the application of new algorithms can significantly increase the speed and efficiency of field development decisions, reduce the risk of adopting incorrect capital-intensive development solutions caused by the "human factor" and reduce downtime by creating an "intelligent assistant" for the field engineer.

Field A description
Geological and geophysical investigation of Field A began in 1947. In 1953 the study of areas by seismic methods was started. In 1967, the first exploration well was drilled in the top part what revealed four potentially productive formations. License area of Field A is approximately 484 km2. 
Later it was determined that the formations U11 and U12 were divided by a layer of impermeable mudstones and therefore formations are hydrodynamic independent. In 2008 drilling of additional exploration wells was carried out to solve the problems of specifying the structure of formation at the field. In 2009 production drilling of the area was started.
Formation U12 is the main object of the Field A and occupies the entire area of reservoir. The productive U12 formation has two types depositional environment: coastal-marine (U12A) and continental (U12B).  U12 layer is represented by alternating mudstones, siltstones, sandstones and clays. The internal structure is quite complex, which is due to the presence of erosion and the replacement in some reservoir parts by clayey impermeable rocks.
The average value of effective oil-saturated thicknesses over the formation is 10.4 m. Analysis of the distributions and average values of porosity, permeability and residual water saturation of the samples shows that the main number of measurements is concentrated in the porosity interval 13 ? 19%. The average values for reservoir properties of the U12 formation are: open porosity - 16%, permeability - 10 mD and water saturation coefficient - 43%. From the distributions for the selected cycles of sediment accumulation of U12A and U12B, it can be seen that the U12A formation have better reservoir properties compared to U12B. The average values of properties are: U12A - porosity = 16.6%, permeability = 39.8 mD, residual water saturation = 36.5%; U12B - porosity = 15.9%, permeability = 5 mD, residual water saturation = 45.4%.
The variety of the structure of the pore space causes a wide range of changes in the reservoir characteristics. The main sandy-siltstone rocks of the U12 layer have a high clay content and higher residual water saturation comparing with the U11layer.
 Total number of drilled wells at the Field A is 113: production wells – 84, injection wells - 29. Field A is developed through 5-spot development system.

Data processing  
Preparing data for forming machine learning database. With the aim of correct machine learning process to form proper database is needed. Initially data should be selected from all obtained information. For all the time of development of Field A hydraulic fracturing treatment was carried out at 46 wells. All wells with HF were participated in machine learning process. 
Two types of parameters were included in database:
•	 geological parameters;
•	field production parameters;
Geological parameters for each well (porosity, oil saturation, NTG, etc.) were obtained from geological model. Permeability was taken from well test results and geological model. Field production parameters (oil rate, watercut, total produced oil, total injected water near considered well etc.) were obtained from monthly field reports.
One of the most important parameters for successful carrying out hydraulic fracturing is reserves around each well.  To evaluate this parameter simulation model of Field A was used. In simulation model cells in drainage area around each well was grouped. Model was simulated and reserves for each wells were determined. 
Technological parameters of the hydraulic fracturing were not used in machine learning.  Firstly, at the stage of calculation fracturing parameters cannot be diversified for different wells and it is seems to be senselessly to take the same for all wells. Secondly, these parameters correlate quite well with a number of geological and technological parameters of well production. For example, the proppant mass has correlations of 50-80% with the average liquid rate of the fluid, water cut for the object and with some of other parameters. Thirdly, at the moment of selection well for production stimulation that data doesn’t exist. For these reasons parameters of hydraulic fracturing were not used in final database for machine learning. 
Thus, the training sample consists of 46 wells and 15 parameters for each well.
Hydraulic fracturing efficiency is necessary to determine to create the target database which will be used in machine learning classifier. In order to estimate hydraulic fracturing efficiency economic criteria was applied – payback period less than 12 months. Payback periods were calculated for each well on with applied hydraulic fracturing. On a group of wells (10 wells) HF was carried out immediately after drilling. Rate of oil for that wells without HF was determined through analytical calculations (Dupuit equation). After economic analysis has been carried out we can observe that 25 wells have positive economic efficiency of hydraulic fracturing treatment (payback period is less than 12 months), whereas for 21 wells HF treatment was inefficient. The fact, that almost half of the wells didn’t show desirable economic effect after the HF treatment, demonstrates that development of the program for selecting wells candidates for HF treatment is a topical issue.

Data processing for machine learning process. The first problem of Field A information selecting is the lack of specific parameters in some wells. It is a common phenomenon in production conditions. For example, there no data considering the number of the perforation holes for some wells. In order to obtain that data a distribution was created. The distribution is based on the existing data from other wells that was constructed.  The distribution turned out to be simple, and then a median value is calculated (for example – 166) and substituted into the sample. The next task of preparing data for machine learning process is inclusion of discrete data in the sample. Not all the machine learning algorithms analyze discrete type of data. One of the ways to solve that problem is direct coding. The main idea of direct encoding is to replace the categorical variable with one or more new characteristics that can take the values 0 or 1. The values 0 and 1 give meaning to the formula of a linear binary classification. Through dummy variables any number of categories can be expressed. Considered database have two categorical values - hydraulic fracturing contractor and efficiency of HF.
Correlating with each other and not affecting on the result, parameters lead to overfit the model of machine learning. In order to exclude them from the training database, the principal component analysis (PCA) was used. PCA additionally allow to project data with many parameters into 2-dimensional plane. The method consists in search of the direction of the maximum variance. It is the direction of data that contains most of the information or the direction along which parameters correlate with each other mostly. Then direction that contains the greatest amount of information and is orthogonal to the first direction is found. In two-dimensional space, there is only one possible orientation but in spaces of higher dimension there can be many orthogonal directions. 
As mentioned above, the database for machine learning consists of 15 parameters. Two main components were used for analysis. Two main components explain 89 % of variability. It is necessary to note the sign (“+” or “–“) of each component is not important, since it indicates the direction of the vector. As a result of the analysis, the most significant parameters were identified - reserves, formation pressure, permeability.
Correlating parameters were eliminated from the sample, such as porosity, total water injected through injection wells, hydraulic fracturing contractor, pad number and BHP pressure. The parameters which were excluded from the sample are seems to be insignificant for the determination of hydraulic fracturing treatment efficiency. The non-inclusion into the resulting sample of porosity can be explained by its correlation with the permeability values, which is valid for Field A. So in the simulation model the permeability was distributed from exactly one equation of interrelation with porosity throughout the U 1 2 bed. The name of the contractor company is not significant for the result, because during the analysis of each hydraulic fracturing treatment success, the ratio of successful and unsuccessful operations is practically the same for each company. The pad number is included in the sample as the index of the location drilling zone. In the original data, there is the sufficient difference in the distribution of successful and unsuccessful HF treatment for each pad. But at the same time, the pad number correlates with the parameter k*h, which is already represented in the initial sample, so the values of the main components for this parameter are low. The elimination of bottomhole pressure can be explained by the fact that bottomhole pressure practically is selected based on the optimal depression and value of bubble point pressure. Eliminated parameters could not be included in the sample by expert decision. However, the try to find all the possible relations between all initial parameters was done. Further, correlating with each other parameters and parameters that don’t influence on results was excluded by using the PCA method.
Additionally, scatter plot of main components was created (Figure ¹ 1) in order to consider transform data with principal of component analysis. It can be seen that the wells are nicely divided into 2 groups (successful and unsuccessful operations). Therefore, the created classifier may be able to separate them. 
After the processing of data, the final training sample has 46 wells and 10 parameters for each well. Parameters in database are oil rate before HF, watercut, net pay, number of perforation holes, permeability, oil saturation, reserves for each well, total produced oil, formation pressure, NTG. Target parameter is successful or unsuccessful HF treatment.

Figure 1 Scatter plot of main components   
 
Machine learning process
Algorithm of machine learning process. To carry out the process of machine learning different programs exist, both statistical (STATISTICA, Matlab etc.) and specialized for machine learning (Orange, Azure etc.). Each of it has advantages and disadvantages. But the general drawback of all ready-made soft packages is limited functionality and lack of flexibility in the settings and visualization of the obtained results. Another way to conduct the process of machine learning is applying the Python programming method. This extensive set of tools of Python libraries (scikit-learn, pandas, scipy) offers a large set of general and special purpose methods. One of the main advantages of using Python is the ability to work directly with the program code using a terminal. Since machine learning is iterative process, this is especially important. Therefore, it was decided to carry out the process of machine learning by the Python programming method.
Machine learning process was carried out in according to following algorithm (Figure ¹2).

Figure 2 Algorithm of machine learning process

Database is subdivided into train and test data. The train data is used for the process of selecting best model parameters – grid search. Test data is employed in order to check accuracy of the model of machine learning with best parameters. 
Grid search process includes the matrix of model parameters and the process of cross-validation. Cross-validation is the most reliable statistical method to assess the generalizing opportunities for classification and regression machine learning models. Cross-validation is more stable and correct tool than splitting the data into training and test sets. During cross-validation process the data is subdivided several times (on k-fold) and several models are built. When performing a five-unit cross-check, the data is first divided into 5 parts of the same size. Then a sequence of models is created. The first model is trained by use of block 1 as a test set, where the correctness is evaluated, and the remaining blocks (2-5) are used as training sets. Then the second model is trained, this time the block 2 is used as a test set, and the data of the remaining blocks is applied as a training set. This process repeats for all blocks. For each of these five splits of the data into the training and test sets the accuracy is calculated. [1]
Set of machine learning parameters are used during grid search process. Cross-validation procedure is performed for each combination of parameters. Further, best parameters are being selected and machine learning model with those parameters is being created. For instance, for the matrix with 2 parameters of method (C and gamma, 6 values for each) and 5-fold cross-validation 6*6*5=180 machine learning models should be created.   
During machine learning process it is important how well the model generalizes the result to new, previously unknown data. The quality of fitting the model to the train data isn’t as significant as the correctness of predictions for new data that not participate in training procedure. So accuracy of the best model is determined by test data which is not used in grid search process. Check is provided again through cross-validation procedure in order to achieve correct accuracy. 
The creating of classifier in order to select well candidates for hydraulic fracturing treatment is binary. Cost of mistakes in that kind of classifier is different. During machine learning process only accuracy is evaluated.  But, unfortunately, it does not take into account the cost of the error. So, if the hydraulic fracturing treatment is carried out and it didn’t give positive effect, company will lost considerably in money. This is called a «false positive» prediction. Another case is a «false negative» prediction - when HF is not performed in the well, but the well have potential for successful hydraulic fracturing treatment. The price of this error is much less - the lost profits. This aspect is taken into account by usage of the parameter for evaluating machine learning models - the confusion matrix.
Thus, three parameters are taken to evaluate the quality of the model: cross-validation for training data (model with best parameters), cross-validation for test data (estimation of generalize ability of machine learning model) and confusion matrix (measurement type of mistake).

Machine learning in order to solve classification task. In order to solve classification task follow machine learning models are used: k-neighbors, support vector classifier, decision tree, random forest, boosting of decision trees, neural network methods.
The first method to be implemented is the k-neighbors method. The method is easy to set and gives quite acceptable accuracy. Drawback of this method is the impossibility of parameters determination that have more affected the result of the prediction. The construction of the model consists of the analysis of the training data set. To predict a new data point, the algorithm finds the nearest points ("neighbors") of the training set and assigns a label corresponding to the "neighbors." When more than one neighbor is considered, a vote is used to assign a label. This means that for each point on the test set, the number of neighbors belonging to the well class with the unsuccessful HF and the number of neighbors belonging to the class with a successful HF are counted. Then the test point is assigned the most common class [2].
The adjustment of the model is to select the number of neighbors and measure the length of the distance between neighbors. The measure of length was selected as the Euclidean distance. The optimal number of neighbors is chosen based on the written program cycle. To visualize the results obtained, the cross-validation of the training and test set graph is plotted against the number of neighbors (Figure ¹3). It can be observed that the optimal number of neighbors is 6-8. Cross-validation of model with best parameters is 0.71. Test accuracy – 0.55.
 
Figure 3  Selection of neighbors number

The next algorithm is the support vector method (SVM). The essence of the method is the separation of wells with different classes by a hyperplane with the maximum distance. In the two-dimensional case, two classes of the object are separated by a straight line, when the distance from points of different classes to this line is maximal. Furthermore, adding non-correlative parameters may improve the predicting ability of the linear model. "Kernel trick" is a mathematical trick that allows training the classifier in a multidimensional space, without actually resorting to the calculation of a new high-dimensional space. This trick directly calculates Euclidean distances to obtain an extended parameters space without actually adding new parameters. Kernel of RBF (radial basis function) is one of the tools for realization «Kernel trick». RBF kernel can be explained as follows: it considers all possible polynomials of all degrees, but the importance of parameters decreases with increasing degree [3].
 The method is very sensitive to data scaling. To implement it, the initial database was scaled so that all the parameters took a value from 0 to 1. Two adjustable parameters were considered: the kernel RBF width (gamma) and the regularization coefficient (C). As a result of grid search process (which was described above), the best combination of parameters is visualized on the heat map.Values of accuracy are changed from 0.59 to 0.74. From the shown heat map it is seen that the highest parameters are C = 100, gamma = 0.0001. Cross-validation of model with best parameters is 0.74. Test accuracy – 0.60. 
Following algorithm to be considered is decision tree. Decision tree is one of the basic machine learning models, distinguished by simplicity and relatively easy interpretation. In fact, it asks questions and build a hierarchy of "if ... then" rules, leading to a solution. The model is based on the concept of information entropy. So, if all wells had successful HF treatment (or vice versa unsuccessful), then the entropy in this case would be zero. Entropy would be maximized if successful and unsuccessful treatments were distributed equally.
One of the advantages of decision tree model is ease of interpretation and visualization. Let consider a decision tree built on the initial database. In our case, the classes of successful and unsuccessful treatments are divided in a ratio of 46% and 54%. The first decisive rule in this case is the value of permeability. The critical value is 1.345 mD. If the permeability of a particular well is less than 1.345 mD, then the algorithm affirmatively answers the question and the further movement is to the left (if answer is “no” – movement is to the right side). Each such rule will reduce entropy and the sample will become more homogeneous. 
The importance is a parameter that evaluates each feature from the point of view of obtaining solutions and can be used as the final indicator of the decision tree model. This number varies from 0 to 1 for each characteristic, where 0 means "not used at all". The importance of the signs in the sum is always 1. However, if the feature has a low significance, it does not mean that it is not informational at all. This means only that this feature has not been selected by the tree, probably since another feature contains similar information. The most significant parameters are the oil rate before HF (26.1%), permeability (21.2%), NTG (21.2%). The parameters that do not effect the result for this model are watercut, number of perforation holes, total produced oil of each by each well.
Main disadvantage of decision tree is overfitting of machine learning model and therefore low accuracy at the test database. Adjusted parameter for that model is max depth of decision tree – method of precutting tree before algorithm is overfitted. Optimal value for considered database of that parameter is 4.   Cross-validation of model with best parameters is 0.74. Test accuracy – 0.63. 
"Random Forest" is a logical improvement of the decision tree model. During constructing a set of weak models (decision tree) for different randomly selected parts of the sample, and then averaging the output, the resulting model will be much better than the result of the work of one decision tree [4].
Three parameters are adjusted during the implementation of the model - number of trees, depth of each tree and maximum number of features for each tree. The number of trees is used as much as possible for the stable predictive capability of the model so in the work 1000 trees were used. Two other parameters were selected in the process of grid search. The best parameters of the model are follows: the maximum number of signs is 4, the maximum depth of the tree is 5.
Distribution of importance features values is demonstrated at the Figure ¹ 4.  The most significant parameters are permeability (19%), thickness of formation (15.2%), formation pressure (13.9%), reserves (13.7%). The parameters that have little effect on the result for this model are watercut, number of perforation holes, NTG of each by each well. Cross-validation of model with best parameters is 0.91. Test accuracy – 0.81. Thus, the «Random forest» machine learning model demonstrates high accuracy value on test database.

Figure 4  Importance of features in Random Forest model parameters                    
                     
The next machine learning model called «Gradient boosting» is also based on decision trees. During the process of boosting, iterations of decision trees occur. In this case, each next step is aimed to compensate the shortcomings of the previous step, that is, the cases that were incorrectly determined at this step, will have more weight in the next step. Thus, this algorithm focuses on weak solutions [5]. 
The main parameters of gradient tree boosting are number of trees and the speed of learning, which controls the contribution of each tree to the elimination of errors in previous trees. These two parameters are closely interrelated, because the lower value of learning rate means that more trees are needed to build a model of similar complexity. Another important parameter is the maximum depth of tree, which is designed to reduce the complexity of each tree. The algorithm used 1500 trees. Optimum parameters of learning rate and maximum depth were found through grid search. Maximum depth is 1, learning rate is 0.001.
The most significant parameters are total produced oil (22.1%), formation pressure (19.1%), permeability (14.6%). The parameters that have little effect on the result for this model are oil rate before HF treatment, reserves. Cross-validation of model with best parameters is 0.88. Test accuracy – 0.70.
Neural networks are one of the most common and well-known algorithms of machine learning. The method arose as a result of trying to simulate the processes taking place in the brain. Neural networks consist of input and output neurons and intermediate layers. Input neurons in this case are parameters of wells and the result of the algorithm is the classification of successful or unsuccessful HF treatments. One of its main advantages of neural networks is that it are able to process information contained in large amounts of data and build incredibly complex models [6]. Neural networks usually require a long learning and careful preliminary processing of data. Similar to the SVM method, neural networks work best with scaled data. In addition, setting up neural network parameters is a difficult process.
Optimum parameters are number of neurons – 100, regularization coefficient (alfa) – 1, maximum number of iterations - 2000. The research of the model weights is one of the ways of analyzing a neural network.. Parameters that have little effect on the result for this model (dark color of weights in heat map) are oil saturation, watercut, perforation holes. Cross-validation of model with best parameters is 0.85. Test accuracy – 0.68.

Comparison of machine learning models for classification task.  As noted above, three parameters are used to evaluate models of machine learning (ML). This is cross-validation of model with better parameters, cross-validation on test data and confusion matrix. The first two parameters are presented in Table ¹1. Confusion matrixes for each ML are demonstrated in Appendix 1. 

      Table 1 Comparison of classification ML models

Machine learning model	Cross-validation with best parameters, %	Cross-validation on test database, %	
Precision, %	
Recall, %	
f-1 score, %
K-neighbors method	71	55	50	60	55
Support vector method	74	60	50	60	55
Decision tree	75	63	57	80	67
Random Forest	91	81	67	80	73
Gradient boosting	88	70	57	80	67
Neural network	85	68	57	80	67

As can be seen from Table ¹1 on all metrics, it better classifies the Random Forest machine learning model. Therefore, it model will be adopted during predicting HF efficiency of remain wells at Field A. The characteristics that affect at the result in this model will be analyzed.
Machine learning in order to solve regression task. In the selection of well candidates for HF treatment, quantitative values are of interest in addition to a qualitative assessment. For this, a regression model based on a neural network was constructed. A neural network method can always be used when there is a relationship between some predicted quantity and its defining values of input parameters. The prediction in the model will now be carried out not according to the classification principle (successful and unsuccessful hydraulic fracturing), but ML model will predict specific values - the average oil production during the year after HF treatment. 
The average annual oil production was taken as a target value, so it reflects not only the potential of the well immediately after well operations, but also the rate of fall in productivity after the HF treatment. This value for the training database is calculated from the data of the monthly field production reports as the difference between the accumulated oil one year after treatment and the accumulated oil before HF treatment divided by 365 days. 
As a result of grid search, a model was chosen based on neural networks with the following parameters: 7 hidden layers, 10 neurons on each layer, MLP algorithm, error function – SOS. Train data accuracy  - 68% , test data accuracy – 90%
As it was stated above, it is rather difficult to estimate the influence of each parameter in a neural network. For this, the weight coefficients on each layer were averaged, as a result it was revealed that permeability and oil saturation and formation pressure exerted the greatest influence on the result of regression.
Prediction of hydraulic fracturing results for new wells. In total, at the Field A 84 production wells, 46 of which were provided HF treatment. The developed model of machine training was applied to the remaining 38 wells. 26 wells were predicted as unsuccessful, hydraulic fracturing was recommended at 12 wells.
With the help of the regression machine learning model, the annual oil production rate for each well recommended for the HF treatment was predicted. This value was used to calculate the economic efficiency at each well in the same way as an estimation efficiency of HF in the beginning of work. Average NPV is 62 mln rub. For well with best NPV design of HF treatment was created in FrackPro program.  

Conclusions
1. Data of Field A were prepared from simulation model, field monthly reports, HF reports, well test results; 
2. Efficiency of each hydraulic fracturing treatment was estimated on base of economic criteria (payback period less than 12 months) in order to create target variable;
3. Principal component analysis was used in order to find out correlating between themselves parameters and exclude them from the database; 
4. Tools and methodology for solving case of study were selected. The machine learning process was conducted using programming in Python. Algorithm of machine learning was included: grid search process in order to find the best model parameters, cross-validation in order to correct estimate generalization ability of machine learning model;
5. Six models of machine learning process were realized and evaluated;
6. Best parameters for each machine learning model were determined with grid search method;
7. Random Forest machine learning model was selected as best through applying  independent metrics;
8. The most influencing parameters on the result of the success of the HF were identified: permeability, formation thickness, formation pressure, reserves;
9. Machine learning model based on neural networks has been trained to estimate the average annual oil production rate after HF treatment;
10. Predictions for other wells were performed and twelve HF treatment well candidates were proposed; 
11. Economic efficiency for selected wells was estimated and design HF treatment for one suitable well was  created;
As a result of the work carried out, a program has been created that identifies candidates for fracturing and calculates the average annual production rate after the operation. In the conditions of fields with a large number of wells, such an assistant in the selection of well candidates for hydraulic fracturing is even more relevant, since it allows quickly analyzing large databases and determining the most influencing parameters.	
 BREAKS HERE
In the Eastern Siberia’s field D that has carbonate reservoir U watercut increased rapidly with significantly decreasing oil production rates after two years from waterflooding system introduction.
The aim of the project is identification of mistakes made during design of current development system for reservoir U of field D which led to the rapid watercut increase with significantly decreasing oil production rates, design of alternative development system for the reservoir which would give the highest economic and technological benefit if it had been applied previously and optimization of current development system which will lead to maximization of recovery factor and NPV in current situation.
New methods of analysis were developed in order to answer the questions which were suggested for the project. The methods are application of log(WOR) rate as a measure of waterflooding system efficiency in a block, injection rates optimization analysis based on production and injection history which enables to obtain optimal regimes for injectors without application of simulation model and accounts for uncertainties accompanied with the investigated reservoir and optimal cyclic regimes determination method which is based on interpolation of results obtained from simulation model for reduction of calculations and accurate determination of the regimes.

Introduction
Analogous fields experience. In order to determine ways for alternative and current development system optimization world experience of recovery methods applied in analogous oilfields was required to be investigated.. The searching was performed for foreign and Russian [1] fields and results of the information analysis were separated from each other. 
Major part of identified analogous fields belong to West Texas fields. West Texas experience of optimization methods for fractured fields shows that successful methods are deep gel treatment, cyclic water injection, low rate water imbibition and optimized injection rate [2].
According to analysis of recovery methods applied in foreign analogous fields water injection is widely used (see Figure 1). In the waterflooding systems peripheral injection shows better results. Air injection/in-situ combustion was used instead of waterflooding due to low reservoir injectivity. Cyclic waterflooding and gas injection show the highest results in terms of recovery factor, but they were applied only once. They may be potentially beneficial recovery methods for reservoir U. Reduction of watercut rate was performed by reduction and further stop of injection. Horizontal drilling and acid fracturing are the most widely used IOR methods in analogous fields. Acidizing is conducted much more rarely, however it may be much more beneficial compared to other techniques.

 
Figure 1 Analysis of recovery methods applied in analogous fields

Water injection and cyclic waterflooding are widely used in analogous Russian fields (see 
Appendix 1). Peripheral and pattern injection are successfully used. Associated gas injection was inefficient and after short time water injection was used instead. Placement of injectors in zones with reduced fracturing leads to increased recovery factors. In layered reservoirs connected with hydrodynamic windows injectors should be located in zones of the windows. Cyclic waterflooding is the most beneficial and the most widely used technique. Beneficial effect of cyclic waterflooding should be anticipated to be initially increasing with each new cycle and then decreasing. Taking into account foreign experience it can be concluded that cyclic waterflooding should be investigated in details for its beneficial application for reservoir U particular case.
As for WAG, according to analogous fields it is applied in fractured reservoirs of type IV, whereas reservoir U has type II. The recovery method has examples of inefficient application in fractured reservoirs [3] [4] so it is doubtful to be applied for reservoir U.

Description of field D reservoir U
Oilfield D is located within the Katangsky district of Irkutsk region. The field was discovered in 1978 year with further exploration up to 1986 year. Field D is multilayered and has several deposits in different layers. Development of reservoir U started in 1998 year.
The reservoir is characterized by multiple faults and OWCs (see 
Appendix 2), however identified levels of OWCs are vague and doubtful.
Reservoir U properties and fluid properties are presented in Appendix 3 and 
Appendix 4. Claimed recovery factor is 45.9%. According to the values current recovery factor is 19%.
As for development parameters (see Appendix 5) it should be highlighted that after two years of waterflooding system introduction watercut increased rapidly with decreasing oil production. Water injection was excessive such that current cumulative compensation is about 2. Introduction of waterflooding system led to stabilization and further growth of reservoir pressure. 
The reservoir U is developed by selective well pattern as a result of anticipated production wells transfers into injection due to absence of oil inflow in them. The selective pattern makes analysis of the system be difficult since each waterflooding cells (blocks) have each own parameters and there are difficulties in their comparison. There are 4 horizontal and 4 vertical production wells and 9 injection wells currently in work.

Identification of flow nature in reservoir U
In order to identify mistakes in current development system, determine alternative development system of reservoir U and optimize current development system flow nature of the reservoir U should be investigated. Waterflooding blocks and nature of water breakthroughs should be identified. Seismic revealed multiple faults within the area of the reservoir which may influence fluid flow. There is uncertainty in their conductivity (whether they are permeable, semi-permeable or impermeable?). Conductivity of the faults may be determined from well test analyses conducted in wells of the reservoir U.

Well test analysis. Different well tests were conducted in production and injection wells during whole field life. Results of the well tests were analysed in the project in order to determine conductivity of faults and interaction between different wells.
Identification of faults conductivity and interaction between wells was performed from analysis of late time regions started from change of derivative plateau. 
Result of the interpretations is map of identified conductivity of faults and interaction between wells (see Figure 2). 

 
Figure 2 Map of identified conductivity of faults and interaction between wells

The map is not full. In order to widen it and analyse interaction between wells as influence of fluid flow in one well on fluid flow in some other well production and injection history analysis was required to be conducted.

Production and injection history analysis. The analysis was conducted in two stages. The first one is analysis of injection influence by an injector on a producer’s technological mode and the second one is analysis of production influence by a producer on some other producer’s technological mode. 
During the first stage all production wells were compared with other injection wells located in the near or at some distance or behind a fault. Parameters which were used for the analysis is water injection in injection wells and liquid production, watercut and bottomhole pressure in production wells (see Appendix 6). As a result map of well interactions (see Figure 3) was obtained which afforded to widen previous map of identified conductivity of faults obtained from well test analyses.

    
Figure 3 Map of interaction between wells and widen map of identified conductivity of faults

During the second stage all production wells were compared in pairs in order to determine production wells waterflooding blocks separated from each other by injection. Map of identified conductivity of faults obtained in the first stage helped to identify blocks which are completely separated from others by impermeable faults. As a result four waterflooding blocks were determined (see Figure 4), however their validity and validity of different wells influence requires more detailed investigation by means of material balance which will be showed further.

 
Figure 4 Map of identified waterflooding blocks

During production and injection history analysis rapid growth of watercut was observed in production wells. However it was not obvious which water is produced (water from aquifer or injected?). In order to answer the question water sample analysis was required to be conducted.

Water sample analysis. Water samples were taken in all production wells during full period of their work. The analysis considered dynamics of watercut, water density, bromides’ and solids’ content. Dates of injection wells put into injection were set in charts of the analysis parameters dynamics in order to identify which injection well is the reason of watercut changes (see Appendix 7). For instance it can be seen in Appendix 7 that there was initially direct breakthrough from well 10, then breakthrough by water injected water through aquifer by well 12 and finally breakthrough by injected water from well 18 in well 4.
The analysis revealed that breakthrough from aquifer is negligible and it occurs due to injected water that comes directly into producers or passing through aquifer. Result of the analysis is map of identified breakthrough types (see Figure 5). The map coincides with map of interaction between wells (see Figure 3) and approves identified waterflooding blocks as evidence of interaction between wells. 

   
Figure 5 Map of identified types of breakthrough

Determination of mistakes made during design of current development system
The chapter is devoted to qualitative and conceptual determination of mistakes. In alternative development system chapter the identified mistakes will be analyzed quantitatively with further determination of alternative system.

Material balance for waterflooding blocks. In order to determine STOIIP in blocks, current recovery factors, cumulative and current compensation in blocks and injection efficiency of injectors material balance concept was used. Double reservoir method [5] was used. STOIIP in matrix and fractures, conductivity between matrix and fractures and participation coefficients (portion of injected water which is injected into a particular waterflooding block) of injection wells in blocks were changed such that to achieve the best history matching (see Figure 6, 
Appendix 9, Appendix 10, 


Appendix 11). 

 
Figure 6 Results of history matching for block 1

Results of the history matching are presented in Table 1, Appendix 12 and 
Appendix 13. It can be seen that map of current STOIIP obtained from material balance coincides with map of current STOIIP obtained from simulation model (see Appendix 14) which was history matched so it is evidence of valid material balance and simulation model. It can be conceptually identified that block 4 has the lowest current recovery factor and that is reasonable due to zero cumulative compensation in the block (absence of injection) and hence too high pressure drop. Other blocks where there is waterflooding system and which was put into production relatively simultaneously have higher current recovery factors so absence of pressure maintenance in block 4 may be considered as mistake.

Table 1 Results of history matching
Waterflooding block	Current STOIIP, MM m3	Current RF, %	Cumulative compensation, %	Current compensation, %
1	0.598	23.9	112.1	42.6
2	1.452	27.5	90.8	76.4
3	0.455	23.4	102.2	86.6
4	0.36	18.3	0	0

As a result participation coefficients for different injectors in different waterflooding blocks were assessed (see Appendix 15). Sum of participation coefficients for a well is injection efficiency of the well. So finally injection efficiency was calculated for each well (see Table 2).

Table 2 Injection efficiency of injectors
 

It should be emphasized that well 9 has zero injection efficiency. It means that the well does not inject water into waterflooding blocks. It is injected in reservoir U but outside of waterflooding blocks and without pressure support for production wells. Consequently well 9 should be eliminated and drilling of the well may be considered as mistake.
Well 6 has low injection efficiency, however it provides high injection efficiency for well 13 probably providing support for water injected by well 13. It may be concluded with confidence analyzing map of streamlines (see Appendix 17). 

WOR analysis and log(WOR) rate. WOR analysis was performed for different waterflooding blocks in order to evaluate rate of watering out and influence of water injection on it [6]. As a parameter of watering out logarithmic WOR rate was chosen which is increase of log(WOR) at a unit increase of cumulative oil production. 
log?(WOR)rate=(?log?(WOR))/(?N_p )
Thus it characterizes efficiency of waterflooding system in block in terms of watering out per produced oil. It was chosen since the parameter is constant for each waterflooding block from the moment of waterflooding system stabilization and hence it is convenient for analysis and comparison of different blocks.
Charts of log(WOR) vs. cumulative oil production for a block together with water injection in the block vs. cumulative oil production were constructed for all waterflooding blocks (see Figure 7, Appendix 16). It can be seen in the charts that rapid increase of injection led to rapid increase of log(WOR) rate. It can be concluded that there may be some analytical relationship between injection volumes and log(WOR) rate. The relationship will be considered in alternative development system chapter where mistakes of current development system will be determined quantitatively. 


 
Figure 7 Log(WOR) rate chart analysis for block 2

Block 1 has much higher log(WOR) rate compared to other blocks (30.9*10-5 1/ton). Investigation of the problem revealed that the reasons of such high value and hence such rapid increase of watercut is excessive injection (overcompensation) in the block.
Summarizing all conclusions of the chapter it should be said that mistakes of current development system are absence of waterflooding system in block 4, drilling of well 9 (inefficient injection) and excessive injection in block 1.

Alternative development system design
The chapter considers quantitative specification of mistakes identified in previous chapter with identification of additional mistakes and solutions to the mistakes which would give technological and economic effect. 

Optimisation of injection rates. In order to determine optimal injection rates for different waterflooding blocks special analysis based on production and injection history was performed. As it was previously discussed there are some observed relationships between recovery factors, log(WOR) rates and cumulative compensation (injection) in the blocks so the relationships were identified analytically by means of identified parameters in blocks.
In order to compare different blocks in one analysis dimensionless parameters were required to be obtained for them which would characterise production efficiency and injection in block. As the parameters average recovery factor rate per one well and pore volumes of water injected per year were chosen. The parameters are connected with each other by means of log(WOR) rate (injection influences log(WOR) rate as rate of watercut and then log(WOR) rate influences recovery factor rate). However there was a problem of uncertainties in STOIIP and pore volumes in blocks since history matching in material balance for different blocks could be performed in different ways with different values. 
Charts of relationship between average recovery factor rate per one well, log(WOR) rate and pore volumes of water injected per year were constructed by uploading the parameters of different waterflooding blocks (see Figure 8). Polynomial trends for recovery factor rate – log(WOR) rate relationships were drawn taking into account that too low log(WOR) rate will lead to minimised watercut but high pressure drop in block and too high log(WOR) rate will lead to high pressure support in block but maximised watercut, so there must be some optimal value of log(WOR) rate between the two extreme cases which will lead to maximised oil production (recovery factor rate). 

 
Figure 8 Determination of optimal dimensionless injection rate range

It can be seen in Figure 8 that there is range of optimal log(WOR) rate in which the highest value of recovery factor rate will be achieved. The range was uploaded in chart of relationship between log(WOR) rate and pore volumes of water injected per year and range of optimal pore volumes injected per year for any block was defined. Optimal dimensionless injection rate was selected to be 0.141 pore volumes per year in terms of minimization of risks in the scopes of defined uncertainties. At the injection rate the result will not be worse than depletion case anyway. As a result injection rates for different blocks were calculated from known average pore volumes (see Table 3).

Table 3 Injection rates for waterflooding blocks
Block	1	2	3	4
Injection rate, m3/day	474	1295	367	281

The identified daily injection was distributed between injectors taking into account participation coefficients for different wells in different blocks (see Appendix 19). Distribution of the injection was performed such that the injectors will inject relatively equal parts of total injection into blocks. Current number of injection wells in blocks is sufficient to provide the required daily injection so drilling of additional injection wells is not required. However there is no injection in block 4 so here waterflooding system should be investigated in details.

Design of waterflooding system in block 4. Problem of absent waterflooding system in block 4 was analysed by means of simulation model which was history matched (see Appendix 20) and economic model. 
In terms of injection the simulation model actually shows doubtful results (the higher injection – the higher recovery factor, see Figure 9). Despite the fact conceptual idea such as variant of injection well can be accepted. As for injection rate it was selected from previous analysis of optimised injection rates where it was gained that optimal injection for block 4 is 280 m3/day. As a result injection well 26 is recommended with injection rate 280 m3/day.

   
Figure 9 Results of sensitivity analysis for block 4 waterflooding system

Optimized injection evaluation. Optimized injection case represents solutions to the current development system problems (do not drill well 9, inject corresponding volumes according to Appendix 19, drill well 26 and inject 280 m3/day). Comparison of optimized injection case and base case shows that the first one is technologically and economically preferable (see Figure 10) so solutions for identified problems are valid and may be recommended for further application.

 
Figure 10 Simulation results for current date (left) and forecast for the next 10 years (right)

Cyclic waterflooding. According to analogous fields experience cyclic waterflooding is recommended for investigation of its further application for reservoir U of oilfield D.
Cyclic waterflooding regimes were determined by means of sensitivity analysis performed in simulation and economic model. Six variants of the regimes were calculated in the models for each block with ultimately produced oil and NPV for each regime as output. Charts (maps) of ultimately produced oil and NPV influenced by injection period and shut-in period were obtained from the calculated values as interpolation (by modified Shepard method) of obtained results in order not to conduct too high number of calculations and determine optimal regimes definitely (see Figure 11). In all the regimes total injected volume per cycle is equal to volume of water which would be injected per the same time but at constant waterflooding with constant injection rates obtained from analysis of optimised injection rates discussed above since the rates are accepted as optimal and they produce optimal level of energy (pressure support) in the reservoir. 

 
Figure 11 Charts of injection period vs. shut-in period for ultimately produced oil and NPV in block 1 (black line is injection restriction in surface lines of current system)

According to NPV map (see Figure 11) there is optimum regime for block 1 with 39x54 days injection/shut-in periods.
During shut-in cycle injectors are not stopped, but work with injection rates 35 m3/day in order not to get ice in sluices at the moments of shut-in in winter. The value of injection rate is sufficient for sluices even without heat insulation material for -50°C temperature. Besides at the low injection rates imbibition of injected water into matrix will occur that will displace oil from matrix as additional mechanism of recovery factor enhancement.
In such a way optimal regimes for all blocks were identified (see Table 4, Appendix 21). Blocks 1,2 and 3 are injection dependent since they have injection wells which inject water in few blocks simultaneously, so single cyclic regime should be chosen for them.

Table 4 Optimal cyclic regimes for different blocks
	Block 1	Block 2	Block 3	Block 4
Injection period, days	39	34	51	46
Shut-in period, days	54	55	63	55

In order to determine single optimal regime for the injection dependent blocks sensitivity analysis was performed with optimal regime of each waterflooding block applied for all the blocks simultaneously. It can be seen in Appendix 22 that block 2 regime is the most beneficial in terms of economy and recovery factor so it was chosen as optimal. As a result 34x55 days regime was chosen for wells in blocks 1,2 and 3 and 46x55 days regime was chosen for well in block 4. Injection rates in injection cycles are presented in Appendix 23. 
Comparison of constant waterflooding with cyclic waterflooding shows that the last one is economically and technologically beneficial (see Figure 12). Hence it can be concluded that absence of cyclic waterflooding is also mistake of current development system. As a result alternative development system is optimized water injection improved by cyclic waterflooding with cyclic regimes 34x55 days for wells in blocks 1,2 and 3 and 46x55 days for well in block 4 and injection rates shown in Appendix 23. The system would afford to produce additional 971 M m3 of oil and to increase NPV at 2.01 bn rub.

 
Figure 12 Comparison of constant waterflooding with cyclic waterflooding

Optimization of current development system
The chapter is devoted to determination of changes which are required to be performed in current situation in order to achieve maximum technological and economical effect.

Waterflooding system in block 4. Currently waterflooding system in block 4 is absent. Design of the system was investigated by means of simulation and economic model. Well 26 is required to be drilled anyway in order to produce oil from the block by 2 wells, but variant of the best injection well is unknown and should be determined by means of technological and economical effect comparison between three variants of injectors.
Investigation of different injectors scenarios in block 4 revealed that well 11 should be transferred into injection and well 26 should be drilled as a producer (see Figure 13). NPV of the case is relatively equal to NPV of case with well 26 drilled as injector, but it gives additional oil compared to mentioned variant.

   
Figure 13 Identification of injection well variant in block 4

Determination of optimal cyclic regime for well 11 was performed by means of the same approach of sensitivity analysis as which was applied for determination of optimal regimes for alternative development system (see Appendix 24). As a result 42x53 regime with injection rate 600 m3/day is recommended which will provide additional oil production of 76.5 M m3 and increase of NPV at 85.9 MM rub compared to base case (see 
Appendix 24 Identification of optimal cyclic regime for well 11 (block 4)
 

Appendix 25).

Cyclic waterflooding in blocks 1, 2 and 3. The same idea of sensitivity analysis was applied in order to define injection regimes in blocks 1, 2 and 3 which were analysed together since they are injection dependent. As a result charts of injection period vs. shut-in period for ultimately produced oil and NPV with identified optimal regime (43x51) were gained (see Figure 14). However injection restrictions of surface lines do not enables to apply optimal regime (areas above black lines in Figure 14 are inaccessible for injection), so enlarging of well 6 sluice at 50 m3/day is required. Finally optimal injection regimes and rates (see Appendix 26) for different wells were identified which will provide 643 M m3 of additional oil and 1.02 bn rub increase in NPV compared to base case. 

 
Figure 14 Identification of optimal cyclic regime for blocks 1, 2 and 3

It can be concluded that optimization of current development system implies stop of well 9 injection, enlarging of well 6 sluice at 50 m3/day, cyclic waterflooding in wells of blocks 1, 2 and 3 with 43x51 work/stop regimes and corresponding injection rates (see Appendix 26), drilling of production well 26 in block 4, transfer of well 11 into injection with 42x53 work/stop regime and 590x35 m3/day injection rate. The actions will bring additional oil production of 643 M m3 and increase of NPV at 1.02 bn rub

Conclusions
Mistakes in current development system: drilling of well 9 (inefficient injection), inappropriate injection in waterflooding blocks 1, 2 and 3, absence of pressure maintenance in block 4, absence of cyclic waterflooding.
Result of the mistakes is 327 M m3 of lost oil and 985 MM rub decrease of NPV.
Alternative development system: drilling of well 26 instead of well 9, cyclic waterflooding in blocks 1, 2 and 3 with 34x55 work/stop regimes and corresponding injection rates (see Appendix 23), cyclic waterflooding in well 26 with 46x55 work/stop regimes and 580/35 m3/day injection rate.
The system would bring additional oil production of 971 M m3 and increase of NPV at 2.01 bn rub. 
Optimization of current development system: stop of well 9 injection, enlarging of well 6 sluice at 50 m3/day, cyclic waterflooding in wells of blocks 1, 2 and 3 with 43x51 work/stop regimes and corresponding injection rates (see Appendix 26), drilling of production well 26 in block 4, transfer of well 11 into injection with 42x53 work/stop regime and 590x35 m3/day injection rate.
The system will bring additional oil production of 643 M m3 and increase of NPV at 1.02 bn rub.
Flow nature in reservoir U was analyzed. Conductivity of faults, interaction between wells and types of breakthrough were identified with subsequent identification of waterflooding blocks.
New methods of analysis were developed in order to answer the questions which were suggested for the project. The methods are application of log(WOR) rate as a measure of waterflooding system efficiency in a block, injection rates optimization analysis based on production and injection history which enables to obtain optimal regimes for injectors without application of simulation model and accounts for uncertainties accompanied with the investigated reservoir and optimal cyclic regimes determination method which is based on interpolation of results obtained from simulation model for reduction of calculations and accurate determination of the regimes.

Acknowledgements
I express my grattitude to:
Kolesov Vladimir, leading engineer in geological modelling group of Irkutsk oil company for help with geological aspects of field D reservoir U;
Alexander Ovchinnikov and Igor Myshevski, engineers of hydrodynamic modelling group of Irkutsk oil company and TNavigator Rock Flow Dynamics staff for help with hydrodynamic model;
Special thanks to Ivan Krasnov, field development division leader of Irkutsk oil company for suggestion of the project theme, organization of two week internship in Irlutsk oil company in order to gather required data and adopt experience of work with carbonate reservoirs, for excellent advices and specification of the work directions.
 BREAKS HERE
Nowadays the use of horizontal wells becomes a common practice, and the experience shows that in the case of cone formation, for the given conditions, the amount of undesired second fluid that a horizontal well produces is usually less than such amount for a vertical well, which is an important motivation for their drilling. According to the studied literature devoted to cone formation processes, cone prediction techniques and methods of coning impact reduction, it was identified that authors of scientific papers propose a large number of algorithms for the analysis of this problem, but the calculations conducted for the same case may show rather different results, and there is no direct instructions about the use of suggested methods for gas condensate reservoirs.
Thus, the aim of this work is to introduce the technique of cone prediction in horizontal wells drilled in gas-condensate reservoirs and prepare recommendations for coning impact reduction in order to prevent negative consequences.
In the present paper the correlation for critical gas rate, below which coning formation does not occur, calculation and water breakthrough time estimation is presented. It is based on empirical modification of Joshi algorithm for critical gas rate evaluation, and Ozkan and Raghavan approach with critical gas rate in the form of Chaperon for water breakthrough time calculation.
According to the conducted sensitivity analysis the main variables which affect coning process were identified, and also the applicability of methods of cycling well operation and well tubing head pressure adjustment is demonstrated from the production and economic point of view.

Introduction
Basic information about coning problem. 	Coning is a production problem in which gas from the gas-cap or bottom / edge water infiltrates the perforation zone in the near-wellbore area and reduces the desired hydrocarbon phase production. It is important to remember that gas coning should not be confused with free-gas production caused by naturally expanding gas cap, and there is a significant difference between water coning and water production caused by the aquifer activity [1]. 
Coning can be considered as a rate-sensitive phenomenon generally connected with high rates of production. But strictly being an effect occurring in the near-wellbore area, cone develops only if the viscous forces drawing fluids towards the wellbore overcome the gravity forces that segregate gas and water from oil [1].
Some important examples of coning are: water production in an oil well with bottom water drive, gas production in an oil well overlain by a gas cap, production of bottom water in a gas well – which is of particular importance in the present paper [1].
Density difference, distance between perforations and fluid contact, fluid viscosity, vertical/horizontal permeability and relative permeabilities can be considered as important variables that affect cone formation process [1].
For the case of horizontal well the cone becomes more of a crest (Appendix 1). 
Field practice shows that for the given reservoir conditions the amount of produced undesired fluid by horizontal well is usually less than for a vertical well – thus, this is one of the main motivations for drilling of horizontal wells.

Literature review. Correlations for critical rate, below which the crest does not form, determination and estimation of coning breakthrough time are of the main interest in the present paper.
	Generally speaking, scientific papers about coning problem can be subdivided into different groups according to the aspects which were studied in them – cases of vertical/horizontal wells, gas/water coning, analytical/experimental/numerical solutions, construction of specific correlations/listing of recommendations/discussion of the engineering techniques etc. But the subdivision with respect to the studied well configuration (vertical or horizontal one) seems to be the basic one. 
	Scientific papers with numbers from [2] to [17] in the references are devoted mainly to the coning problem for the case of vertical wells and are not of the particular interest here.
	One of the very early analytical studies related to horizontal wells has been published in 1963 by Efros [18]. In 1986 Chaperon presented the method which includes variations for isotropic/anisotropic cases of gas/water coning predictions in horizontal/vertical wells [19]. Two years later the Joshi’s algorithm for gas coning critical rate estimations was presented [11]. In 1990 Ozkan and Raghavan designed an approximate analytical method for the investigation of the behavior of water or gas cone which requires only a numerical integration of trigonometric functions and is considerably simpler than previously existing methods, and, consequently, can be used for quick engineering estimates of the breakthrough time before detailed simulation studies and comparison of horizontal and vertical well performances [20]. Approximately at the same time period, Dikken presented correlations for the critical rate for gas and water cresting for horizontal wells drilled in lateral edge-water drive reservoirs, and placed either at the top or bottom of a reservoir [11]. In another paper published by Yang and Wattenbarger an algorithm suitable not only for the prediction of critical rate and breakthrough time, but also for the WOR dynamics studying was suggested; an empirical relation of the format similar to Addington’s coning correlation [15] was developed, and sensitivity analysis was performed using numerical simulation [21]. Hoyland et.al. in their work conducted a more complex analysis of water coning problem which incorporates the derivation and comparison of two methods – the analytical and numerical ones; the first of them is based on Muskat’s solution (with replacing of uniform flux at the wellbore assumption by infinitely conductive wellbore), and the results of the second approach include equation and diagram for anisotporic case [22]. In 1992 Guo and Lee proposed a general approach of gas/water coning problem for horizontal wells using conformal mapping method, and an analytical solution for maximum water-free oil production rate determination was stated and confirmed by numerical simulation [23, 24]. Two years later Hatzignatiou and Mohamed in their paper observed that existing correlations of water breakthrough for horizontal wells do not provide accurate prediction, and solutions for gas coning did not exist in principle by that moment of time, and, consequently, a three-dimensional, three-phase, black-oil, commercial simulator was used to examine the influence of different rock and fluid properties, reservoir anisotropy and well configurations on breakthrough time, and derive relations for the prediction of time at which gas or water cones into the well with taking into consideration the effects of numerical dispersion [25]. In 1996 Permadi presented one more study on horizontal wells performance for the case of bottom water drive reservoirs; a semiempirical method, which takes into account non-uniform flux and flow geometry through the use of a special factor that contains well position, well length and drainage area, was introduced [26]. Jiang and Butler developed a numerical approach for the description of displacement of oil by bottom water drive towards a horizontal well which can be found during experiments with the use Hele-Shaw model; the attention in this work is focused on the study of the effects of unstable flow conditions on the shape of observed interface and oil recovery [27]. The similar aspect of coning problem was studied in another Ozkan et.al. paper – with the use of analytical model it was shown that the shape and breakthrough time of water or gas cone are significantly affected by the pressure drop within the wellbore, and that the wellbore hydraulics leads to breakthrough at the heel of the well [28]. In 2001 one more numerical approach to gas coning problem was introduced by Benamara and Tiab – a special plot was designed for accurate identification of the breakthrough moment and regression analysis was performed to predict critical oil rate and GOR dynamics [29]. In the recent work published by Salavatov and Ghareed the computer program for critical rate, breakthrough time and optimal well horizontal section position above WOC determination was constructed [30]. Also in 2010 Permadi and Jayadi proposed the semi-empirical method for the prediction of post-breakthrough performance of horizontal wells in the case of water coning which can be realized through the use of iterative procedure of calculations [31]. Paper published by Al-Enezi et.al. covers a complex analytical method developed for the prediction of critical drawdown, critical production rate, extent of water coning, time for water breakthrough and shut-in time required to subside the cone for very high mobility reservoir [32].  In 2011 Makinde et.al. presented the Eclipse 100 based study on post-breakthrough performance of horizontal wells in terms of WOR, breakthrough time and critical oil production rate; also the sensitivity analysis for identification of the most important reservoir parameters and regression analysis for development of useful relations were run [33]. An overview of the coning problem in horizontal wells for different cases is presented by Joshi [11].
	Weinstein and Papatzacos papers are discussed here separately from other works because they provide the analysis for three-phase coning [34] and simultaneous gas and water cones in an anisotropic infinite reservoir with a horizontal well placed in the oil column [35] respectively. Thus, as a result of the first work, it is stated that the problem under consideration is seemed to be difficult to formulate, and according to the second paper, the two-cone solution allows the prediction of single-cone of gas or water breakthrough time in the case if the well is located at the impervious top or bottom of the oil zone.
	Graue and Filgate paper published in 1971 was the only found work which provides the study of water coning for the gas condensate field. The results of numerical modeling has shown that the critical height is the dominant factor in determining the critical flow rate, ratio of horizontal to vertical permeability is the next in the list of importance, and that non-Darcy flow can be approximated through the Darcy flow model since there is no strong influence of turbulence effect [36].
	Some of the authors of scientific papers proposed basic recommendations that can be useful for coning modeling. For example, in MacDonald et.al paper published in 1970 three techniques of coning behavior numerical simulation are presented and compared – the first one employs implicit pressure-explicit saturation (IMPES) analysis with the production terms treated implicitly, the second one is similar to the first model except that interblock transmissibilities are also treated implicitly in the saturation equation, and the third model is fully implicit with respect to all variables [37]. In 1993 Consonni, Thiele, Palagi and Aziz introduced the idea of flexible gridding techniques for coning studies in vertical and horizontal wells – the applicability of accurate spatial discretization around the wells through the use of local Cartesian grid refinement was proved [38].
	The question of strategies that can be applied in order to reduce the negative coning consequences is also of the particular interest. Thus, Peng and Yeh stated that the use of horizontal wells instead of vertical wells can be considered as proven technology for the reducing of the coning problems and improving recovery in the reservoirs with a gas cap and/or underlying aquifer [39].  Freeborn et.al. listed some recommendations in the sense of horizontal well locations and technology of their drilling and completion [40]. As part of that, for example, the use of horizontal well completion with stinger for reducing coning problems can be recommended [41].
	Summarizing all the discussed above, it can be concluded that the most of proposed methods of critical production rate or breakthrough time estimation frequently show rather different results, and it can be explained from the point of view of wide range of assumptions that have been used. Also, there is no direct instructions about the application of existing correlations for the case of gas-condensate reservoirs. However, on their basis it became possible to list some general recommendations and design useful engineering techniques. Thus, the applicability of the described methods should be carefully studied for each particular case. 
For the further analysis the following techniques were chosen: Chaperon [19], Ozkan and Raghavan [20], Yang [21], Joshi [11, 30], Efros [11, 18], Karcher and Giger et al. [11] – for critical rate estimation; Ozkan and raghavan [11, 20], Paptzacos et al. [11, 35] – for crest breakthrough time estimation with substitution of critical gas rates calculated with the correlations discussed above in them.

Characteristics of Field M and Formation P
Oil and gas condensate field M is located in the Yamal-Nenets autonomous district of Tyumen region, in the south part of Tazovskiy peninsula (Appendix 2).
	Target formation P is confined to the lower part of the middle of tangalovskaya suite (lower Hauterivian). It was formed in shallow marine depositional environment, that is why wave, lenticular and horizontal lamination can be observed jointly with rare inclusions of coal detritus and pyrite. Deposits are presented by sandstone and silty-shalestone interbedding. Cross-section of formation P was constructed to show the complex behavior of propagation of sand bodies (Appendix 3).

	Main characteristics of reservoir gas and water are presented in Table 1, and main parameters of target formation P are presented in Table 2.

	Table 1 Main characteristics of reservoir gas and water
Parameter	Values
Gas viscosity, cP	0.028
Gas FVF, frac	0.004
Gas density, kg/m3	0.75
Water density, kg/m3	1016
Water viscosity, cP	0.347
Water FVF, frac	1.017

	Table 2 Characteristics of formation P
Parameter	Value
TVD of formation top, m	2933
Deposit type	Gas condensate, massive
Reservoir type	clastic
GWC, m	2972
Average thickness, m	55.9
Average net pay thickness, m	12.8
Average porosity, fractions	0.17
Average gas saturation, fractions	0.72
Permeability, mD	67.6
NTG, fractions	0.58
Average number of permeable intervals	8.5
Initial reservoir temperature, °C	85
Initial reservoir pressure, atm	300
Rock compressibility, 1/Mpa*10-4	50
Condensate yield, g/m3	160





Development of cone prediction technique and reccomendations for coning impact reduction
Selection of well-candidates. To select the well-candidates for further study, characteristics of their performance and data from the provided simulation model of Field M were carefully analyzed.
At the first stage the wells cross-sections were created and studied in order to identify the wells around which there are no significant impermeable layers and well-developed aquifer zone is present. Thus, the wells 2-1, 3-3a, 4-1a and 6-1 were selected (Figures 1 is given for example, and similar figures for other wells are presented in the Appendices 4-6). 
 
Figure 1 Vertical permeability and initial water saturation distribution around well 2-1
At the second stage the changes in water saturation distribution over time were studied to identify the characteristic behavior of water saturation which can be used as indicator of crest formation (all the relative figures are presented in the Appendices 7-10).
At the third stage the dynamics of gas rate and water-gas ratio over time were analyzed for each well, and it was concluded that the beginning of the intervals of the most intensive WGR increase can be considered as the moments of water crest breakthrough, and it was confirmed with the help of simulation model, because such moments coincide with the time of water breakthrough into the perforation cell (Figure 2 is given as an example, and the plots for other wells are presented in the Appendices 11-13).
 
Figure 2 Performance of well 2-1
Initial data preparation for the correlations applying. Initial data for further calculations were prepared with the use of provided simulation model of field M, characteristics of target formation P and reservoir fluid, and information about wells configurations. 
For more accurate estimation of reservoir properties for each well, their drainage areas were calculated with the use of Saavedra and Reyes method [42].
Also, to apply the correlations listed above, the knowledge of relative permeability curves for the gas-water system is required (Appendix 14).
Thus, all the necessary parameters are presented in the Table 3 below.

Table 3 Main characteristics of horizontal wells and their drainage areas
Well	Parameter
	kh, mD	kv, mD	?, frac	Av. net pay thick., m	Length of hor. section, m	Height of perf. int., m	Well radius, m	Drainage area, m2	Depth of hor. section, m
2-1	47.83	33.31	0.125	23	730	12	0.07	1818060	2961
3-3a	57.6	16.6	0.161	29	510	15	0.07	97497	2954
4-1a	51.2	13.6	0.162	25	775	21	0.07	181453	2962
6-1	54.3	13.57	0.157	18	750	6	0.07	918764	2959

 





Critical gas rate and breakthrough time calculations. The results of critical gas rate estimation for each well under consideration is presented in the table below.

Table 4 Critical gas rate estimation
Well	Critical gas rate, m3/day
	Chaperon	Ozkan and Raghavan	Yang	Joshi	Efros	Karcher and Giger et al.
2-1	2178048.5	828581.3	30.7	47215	116638	116728.1
3-3a	6990320.9	1067134.9	86.7	126198	1031340	1036424
4-1a	11094808.2	881802.6	22.8	59942.6	813989.8	816153.9
6-1	3381999.39	1007167.6	68.6	43215.2	129847	129951.1
After the comparison of estimated critical gas rates with observed data it was concluded that Joshi correlation can be considered as the most suitable one. Also, it was decided to conduct the correlation analysis and establish the relationship between calculated critical gas rate by Joshi’s method and observed gas production rate at the breakthrough moment. This correlation can be useful for the wells in which cresting effect is observed, and it is necessary to reduce their gas production rate in order to stop the undesired water production.

After that the cone breakthrough time was estimated with use of methods listed earlier. The results are presented in the table below.

Table 5 Breakthrough time estimation
Method	Well	Cone breakthrough time, days
		Chaperon	Ozkan and Ragha-van	Yang	Joshi	Efros	Karcher and Giger et al.
Ozkan and Raghavan	2-1	0.129	0.339	9148.365	5.950	2.409	2.407
	3-3a	0.251	1.642	20220.555	13.888	1.699	1.691
	4-1a	0.110	1.390	53643.423	20.450	1.506	1.502
	6-1	0.139	0.468	6866.227	10.906	3.630	3.627
Papatzacos
et al.	2-1	6.948	18.265	492842.985	320.533	129.752	129.651
	3-3a	4.815	31.538	388276.388	266.684	39.632	32.472
	4-1a	3.590	45.174	1743193.410	664.550	48.938	48.808
	6-1	5.904	19.825	290890.723	462.041	153.775	153.652
It was concluded that calculated breakthrough times significantly differ from the observed data. From the first view, Papatzakos et al. method with the critical gas rate in Joshi form seems to be the suitable one, but it was decided to conduct the additional correlation analysis, on the basis of which the relationship between Ozkan and Raghavan breakthrough time with the critical rate by Chaperon and actual time was established as that one which demonstrated the highest correlation level. Discussed correlations for critical gas rate and breakthrough time calculations are presented in Figure 3.

 
Figure 3 Correlations for critical gas rate and brekahtorugh time determination
Speaking about the results of applying of existing correlations for critical gas rate and breakthrough time estimation, it is necessary to notice that the idea of significant difference in calculated values stated according to the literature review is confirmed. It can be explained from the point of view of wide range of simplifying assumptions used in them. Thus, their applicability was improved through the use of comparison with observed data and empirical modifications.
Sector simulation model construction. For the further sensitivity analysis and economic efficiency evaluation of methods of negative coning impact reduction, on the basis of provided simulation model the sector one was constructed with the use of «Eclipse» and «Petrel» software. It includes well 2-1 as the target one and 10 neighbor wells because they affect the geometry of flowlines.  Main parameters of resultant sector simulation model are presented in the table below.






Table 6 Main parameters of sector simulation model
Parameter	Value
Target well	2-1
Number of neighbor wells	10
Tubing head pressure of target well, atm	95
Tubing head pressure of neighbor wells, atm	120
Number of cells in X direction	59
Number of cells in Y direction	57
Number of cells in Z direction	40
Total number of cells	134520

Sensitivity analysis overview. To achieve the better understanding of crest formation process it was decided to study the influence of changes in permeability anisotropy, well tubing head pressure, length of well horizontal section and distance between GWC and perforation interval on the critical gas rate and breakthrough time values with the use of sector simulation modelling. The resultant spider-diagrams are presented in Figure 4.
 
Figure 4 Spider-diagrams critical gas rate and breakthrough time
Sensitivity analysis has shown that crest breakthrough time increases with the increase in distance from gas-water contact and well tubing head pressure and decrease in length of well horizontal section and permeability anisotropy. The same behavior can be observed in the case of critical gas rate, but in this situation there is no reason to speak about tubing head pressure changes because current gas production rate is being determined mainly due to variations in reservoir pressure.

Cycling well operation performance. In the present paper it was decided to evaluate the applicability of cycling well operation as the method of negative coning impact reduction. The analysis similar to the sensitivity one was conducted – the variants with well shut-in time equal to 15%, 30% and 45% of the observed breakthrough time in the base case were studied. The resultant plots of gas rate and WGR values comparison between the base scenario and case of well shut-in time equal to 15% of breakthrough time are presented below, and similar plots for other scenarios are presented in the Appendices 15-16.

 
Figure 5 Comparison of gas rate and WGR dynamics for the case of 15% well shut-in time
Cycling well operation generally can be recommended as the method for negative coning impact reduction. It can be seen, that in this scenario WGR values are less than in the base case because the effect of «aligning» of gas-water contact surface due to the action of gravity forces occurs, and gas production rate values are higher after the end of well shut-in period because of partial reservoir pressure build-up. 
Economic efficiency of cycling well operation.To study whether cycling well operation as the method of coning impact reduction can be beneficial in the economic sense or not, the performance of target well 2-1 was studied for the 4 cases described in the previous section. For the calculation of Net Present Value (NPV) the following economic parameters were chosen:








Table 7 Economic parameters for NPV calculation
Parameter	Value
Profit from sales of gas, RUR/1000 m3	4013
Expenditures for water production, RUR/m3	380
Discount rate, %	15%

The resultant plot of NPV values for different scenarios is presented in the Appendix 17.
This plot was constructed for the case of well exploitation during the period of 11 years in each scenario. But to identify whether cycling well operation method can be really beneficial or not, it was decided to choose the critical WGR value equal to 0.0001, which reflects the condition of the end of well exploitation due to inability of necessary tubing head pressure maintenance for correct operation of surface facilities, and to reduce the discount rate to the value of 4%. The new plot was constructed for this scenario – it is presented in the Appendix 18.
As it can be seen, the variant of well exploitation with the well shut-in period equal to 45% of observed breakthrough time can be economically beneficial.
Economic justification of tubing head pressure selection. The same economic parameters were chosen for the comparison of scenarios with target well exploitation at different tubing head pressures described in «sensitivity analysis» section. The resultant plot of NPV values is presented in the Figure 6.
 
Figure 6 NPV vs Time for different values of target well tubing head pressure
The method of tubing head pressure adjustment can be considered as the easiest one to control the cone formation process. But on the basis of conducted economic study it can be concluded that the variant of well exploitation with the least tubing head pressure among taken into consideration can be considered as the most beneficial one despite the fact of earlier water breakthrough.

Conclusions 
 Applicability of existing correlation techniques for the conditions of target formation P was achieved only through the use of empirical modifications based of information about 4 wells – it determines the necessity of construction of own cone prediction algorithm for the general case of gas condensate reservoir and checking it for the larger number of wells located in gas-condensate formations of different properties.
Sensitivity analysis has shown that length of well horizontal section and distance from gas-water contact should be taken into consideration during the design of new wells trajectory.
On the basis of economic efficiency analysis it can be concluded that the methods of cycling well operation and tubing head pressure adjustment as approaches to negative coning impact levelling can be used, but optimum well operation parameters should be determined according to current economic and field development conditions.
The use of multivariate data analysis and mathematical theory of optimization principles can be helpful for accurate determination of optimum well configuration and performance parameters. 
 BREAKS HERE
The main purpose of the work is to learn the principle of spatial distribution of petrophysical parameters, which depend on lithological and facial zonality in the fields and to figure out the level of influence of these variations on determination of STOIIP. For realization of the aims Field K was selected as an object of the investigation. Therefore, first of steps in preparing the work includes learning facial features of the field. Then, make analysis and application of methods determining such parameters as shaliness of a rock, porosity, permeability and water saturation in each allocated facial zones. Moreover, the work includes application of both traditional methods of identifying counted above parameters and less used models to estimate parameters more correctly in each zone. This is caused by selecting method which has the highest correlation level with core data extracted from wells. Having chosen method determining each parameter in every facial zone with the best correlation, reservoir parts of the formation is identified due to cut off calculations. Consequently, average values of each parameter were determined in reservoir parts of the formation. Moreover, work involves analyzing obtained average values of parameters in each facial zone and estimate the influence of parameters variance over formation on calculating STOIIP value.	Formation U13 is an object where all intended investigations are provided as it contains all economically recoverable reserves. The formation consists of heterogeneous lithology both on the vertical and lateral directions. During investigations it has become clear that each facial zone is special and has application of separate equations determining petrophysical parameters. It is crucial in the work to justify each selected method on the base of geology as every equation is created for particular conditions and these conditions should be met in zones where it has been chosen as main equation. 									The work has essential scientific and practical significance, as lithological and facial zonality with its variable average values over the formation impact on calculated volume of reserves in any field. Furthermore, selection a method as the main in each zone provides correct determination of average values of parameters which is crucial to avoid calculation of overestimated or underestimated values of reserves.

Introduction
Literature review
Actuality of this investigation conducted with variation of petrophysical parameters over the area of the field, which first of all, impact on the increase of the uncertainty during calculation reserves, development and exploitation of the field.												 It is necessary to create several variances of petrophysical models of reservoirs for qualitative research and planning the development and exploitation of the field. Set of physical properties advantageously depends on lithological composition of the rock and depositional environment. Therefore, one of the major aims of similar investigations is exposure of the principle of spatial distribution of petrophysical parameters, reservoir properties depending on lithological and facial zonality of the field.								There were some investigations on this theme before, because of its actuality and analyzed by several specialists. The work of Krivoshekov S. N. who is professor of Perm Polytechnic University can be as a sample of the works. At his article, he counted some difficulties, which occur during exploring and exploitation of reservoirs, which were formed during different cyclic changes of sedimentation. Therefore, as he claims for rational scheme of the development of the field and optimization of the wells exploitation, it is necessary to investigate more detailed the structure of the formation, determination lateral extension of the facial zones. A correct selection of petrophysical models is the essential stage. Counted above investigations were organized in Arkhangelskoe oil field, for which petrophysical parameters were determined in each facial zone and some facial model was constructed and analyzed by him. [2]												Moreover, Ph.D. in technical science at the same University (Perm) Filkina N. in her academic paper discusses probabilistic and statistical justification of the facial zoning of the Devonian clastic deposits. It is mentioned in her work, that capability of using geophysical data for forecasting determined facies and lithology from core is scientifically proved. Furthermore, she emphasized that forecasting facial and lithological features of cross sections in wells is more preferable than forecasting lithological differences, as the first is associated with genetic features of productive formations. Consequently, the work contains methodological ways for forecasting lithological and facial heterogeneity, which assumes transportation of facial data obtained from explored depth intervals to unexplored ones due to logging. This can be claimed, that the method is logical continue of lithological and facial analysis of the core. As the result, a probable lithological and facial characteristic of a cross section (probabilistic curve) was obtained, which includes information about petrophysical parameters of the rock and serves as the main for creation of detailed 3D models. Counted above statements were analyzed and applied simultaneously in several fields such as Kustovskoe, Andreevskoe and Malo-Usinskoe. [2]		Consequently, both in mentioned investigations above and in this work several methods of determination of rock parameters such as shale volume, porosity, permeability and water saturation were considered. Moreover, several different equations were examined in this work to solve all tasks.

Shaliness determination method
Volume of shaliness can be calculated by several various methods. Some of them which were considered in this work will be counted below with their application conditions:							- Shaliness determination method due to neutron log data was recommended for sand body with low porosity value. Also, feature of rock matrix has low effect on this indicator. [5]						- Complex method for determination this parameter due to resistivity log found wide application in formations with high resistivity values. [6]										-  Shaliness determination method due to gamma ray log may display favorable results in formations with low composition of Uranium, where radioactive salts are concentrated on the rock. The advantage of the method is its simplicity, quickness and reliability. It can be applied in rocks consisting of Thorium, potassium in high content, where correction should be done in uranium and the diameter of the borehole. Less efficiency was met in rocks, where there is little composition of high resistivity minerals. [6]							- Method based on SP curve for determination of shaliness widely applied in conditions, where there is difference in resistivity between drilling mud and formation water. The method is believed being more simple and quick for calculations. However, it has low vertical resolution and overestimates shale volume in hydrocarbon saturated zones. [6]
				
Porosity determination method
	Porosity of rock can be calculated by several various methods. Some of them which were considered in this work will be counted below with their application conditions:   							- porosity from density log: the most reliable method for calculations of both total porosity and effective in the rocks, consisting of one or several minerals in fluid saturated formations. Displays good results in combination with core framework density [5]; 											- porosity from neutron log: shows feeble corrupted data in estimation of total porosity in fluid saturated formations. It is sensitive enough to gas and shale. In fluid saturated zones where formation has low hydrogen index, porosity is underestimated. Hydrocarbon corrections should be considered [6];						- porosity from sonic log: method is effective in porosity determinations in rocks saturated either water or oil. It is simple and quick, but sensitive to formation pressure and compressibility of the rock, especially in unconsolidated [6];
											
Permeability determination method
In this work to estimate permeability parameter in formation U13 following methods were examined:		- The most common used and logical for the application method is equation obtained from relation of core permeability (corrected on Klinkenberg) to core porosity. It is determined that the method is the main in almost all facial zones of the formation and recommended as the best equation which gives reliable data. [6]			- Timur equation: was derived by specialists to determine permeability parameter in particular parts of the fields located in Mexican Gulf;											
Water saturation determination method
Determination of water saturation of rock often includes porosity value, log resistivity data, formation water resistivity. For calculation of water saturation of the rock exist several methods which were examined in this work:														
- Archie-Dakhnov equation: the most widely used equation for calculation of rock saturation. However, it is necessary to make some changes in different rocks:			
•No Archie pore geometry ( intergranular and intercrystal);
•Conducting minerals, as shale or pyrite;
•Fresh formation water  
This method was successfully applied in this work as main model of calculating water saturation parameter. [4]		- Besides, some of major equations are equation of Wortington, Patchett and Herrick. [6]			- Moreover, there are such equations as Simandoux and Indonesian, which were created mainly for saline formation water and average content of scattered shaliness. [5]									
Calculation Part	
On the base of obtained data some log interpretation works were organized. The sequence of works and results will be presented here:   											The lithology results were gained by set of log such as:						- 	- Gamma ray (GR) log which measures the presence of such radioactive elements as Uranium, Thorium and Potassium. It is known that usually counted elements are met in high proportions in mudstone, argillites (bituminous). The little amount of these elements may be met in sandstone, siltstone rocks. [6]				- Spontaneous potential (SP) method is based on the measurement of natural permanent electrical field of the Earth in boreholes. It allows getting information about granulometric size of the rock grains. In sandstone interval where grain size is larger it displays low values, while in clay interval the value in SP curve is higher [6].		- Due to caliper data one is able to get information about the diameter of borehole. Usually in reservoir intervals the diameter decreases due to mud cake thickness. In coal intervals the diameter increases as coal is nesh and it is easy to be broken. [5]										Moreover, such porosity determining logs as neutron, acoustic and density logs may give information about lithology. On the base of considered theory above lithology of the cross sections in all 12 selected wells in 6 facial zones were determined. Furthermore, the saturation in these wells were identified due to some electrical logs like:		-Lateral convention logs (LLD, GZ1, GZ2, GZ3, GZ4, GZ5) also Induction (IK) log which characterizes the properties of the rock to conduct through electric ions launched by electric logs.     					- Micropotential (MPZ) and microgradient (MGZ) also measure rocks resistivity in wellbore area or in other words flushed zones. [7]										In such manner interpretation was done for all 12 considered wells. As a sample of done work sketch board of 220 well is illustrated in (fig.1) in appendix:								Moreover, as mentioned in geological part, U13 formation consists of 6 facial zones and to analyze all these zones 2 wells per each zones were considered as objects.							All calculations of 12 wells will be presented as an example of well ¹ 220. As objective is U13 formation, all quantitative calculations will be conducted only for this formation on the base of core and log data in well ¹220. 

 Shaliness estimation
Before estimation of effective porosity, shaliness of the rock needs to be determined. There are several methods of calculating this parameter which is considered in this work. 
-The first model is built from SP curve:
 
where Usp – SP logging tool response, Uspmin – tool response to clean sand, Uspmax – tool response to shale.		According to wells ¹ ¹ 220, 223 for this zone SP method of calculating shale volume in the rock is more applicable and effective porosity calculated due to this equation shows the highest correlation with core data. Determination of other parameters such as porosity, permeability and saturation is based on this model.  			The second model is based on Gamma Ray curve. All necessary values are obtained from GR curve:
 
where GR – GR logging tool response, GRmin – tool response to clean sand, GRmax – tool response to shale. [5]
Furthermore, parameter of shaliness of the formation was identified with several equations which were created for special oilfields:
1.      - Larionov model which was considered in 1969 year for Mesozoic and older rocks; 
2.      - Larionov model which was considered in the same year for tertiary rock		   3.       - Clavier model;
4.       - Steiber model


5.   Shaliness of the particular interval can be also specified from neutron log curve    				             		
where  - value in neutron log curve,  - value from neutron log curve in shale zone. 
6. Vsh = ( -  )/( - )  - neutron and density logs combination
where  - value in neutron log curve,  - value from neutron log curve in shale zone,  - value in neutron log curve,  - value from neutron log curve in shale zone  [7]						In this zone as mentioned before shale volume determined with SP method gives best results, however in other facial zones other shaliness calculating method shows better results in identifying some reservoir parameters. 
Porosity parameter of the formation was calculated by several different methods. First of all, total porosity is figured out from available porosity curves. Secondly, effective porosity values were received applying shaliness calculation methods discussed in part above. Finally, obtained effective porosity values by several porosity logs and methods using different models of calculating shaliness are correlated with open porosity values given from core analysis. Method which shows the highest similarity with core data is selected as most reliable and in future calculations these values will be used as porosity data of the zone. Equation with the highest correlation level for this facial zone (second) is method which considers mineralogical composition of the formation.  The sequence of applying this method will be shown below:	Firstly, as neutron log curve characterizes hydrogen index, one needed to convert this data into total porosity values. Consequently, two points were chosen where first one in coal depth with 0.88 hydrogen index and 0.22 porosity value, while the other point is in tight sand depth where hydrogen index 1.73 with 0.04 porosity value. Also, the third point in clean sand depth is selected with 0.185 porosity value and 1.4 h.i. Using these three points one built a graph relation porosity to hydrogen index to obtain equation which characterizes total porosity value gained from neutron log.  

 

Fig. 2 NGR units vs porosity relation
Having obtained total porosity value one need to eliminate shale volume calculated by SP method to figure out effective porosity by following equation [6]:	

								
In next stage some mineral composition of the formation where well ¹ 220 entered is analyzed due to fig.3 and effective porosity equation which takes into account mineral composition of rock is:


where   - effective porosity value,   - fraction of mineral in that depth,   - neutron log value in fresh water(usually it equals 1),   - total porosity value.											 The equation has favorable application under special conditions, for example:					- Rock advantageously consists of 2-3 minerals;								Actually, the fig. 3 illustrates that U13 formation where core had been taken out composes advantageously quartz and feldspar. 												- Homogenous distribution of minerals in the rock;							The consistence of minerals doesn’t change significantly in this area.						- High content of shale (kaolinite) 									The fig. 3 displays that maintenance of shale (kaolinite) in cross section is high enough. 			To sum up, a condition for which method was created completely fits to conditions observed in facial area ¹ 2. Therefore, the correlation of values gained by this equation and core data has the highest level of matching 85% which was proved by figure below:






 
  	Fig. 4 Correlation of Neutron effective porosity (SP) vs Core porosity
Permeability determination
Having finished estimation of porosity values, it was necessary to figure out permeability values in the formation. To realize this several methods including irreducible water and porosity were considered:	
- Tixier relation:   

- Timur relation:   

- Coates-Dunamoir relation:  

- Coates relation:   

- Mineralogical composition: 
where A-const = F+?Bi?Mi. F- (4-6), Bi- mineralogical composition, Mi- mass of minerals [6].			However, neither of the methods given above gave favorable results in correlation.			Then due to core data one constructed a graph relation of permeability (corrected by Klinkinberg method) to porosity:
 
   Fig. 5  Core permeability and porosity relationship				
Obtained equation from this graph:

was used as base model and it has the highest correlation level (76 %) in cross plot:






       	Fig. 6 Correlation of base permeability value vs core permeability data
The next method used to match log permeability values with core permeability is permeability determining equation from irreducible water saturation [2]: 
 
Where Cperm- permeability const=62500, Dperm- Porosity exponent=6.0, Eperm- irreducible saturation exponent=2.0, ?-matched effective porosity values. This method with correlation 72 % is regarded as the second method for its high enough repeatability level. (Fig. 6)
Moreover, the last method to identify permeability value was determination this parameter from formation factor which didn’t give better results [2]:
K=Fperm/(FF^Gperm)

where Fperm- permeability constant (fractional), Gperm- porosity exponent (fractional), FF-formation factor (from core).
Water saturation determination
The last petrophysical parameter which should be determined and matched with core data is rock water saturation. First of all, to apply these methods some constants were identified which are used in several water saturation methods. From the figs. 7-8 tortuosity factor a=2.19 and degree of cementation m=1.3 was defined [8]
As the result formation water resistivity equals 0.069 Ohmm. Formation resistivity (Rt) was defined from LLD log and the results were corrected to skin in every well. 							Having identified some necessary constants for future calculations several methods were considered to determine formation water saturation:										1. the method which has the highest correlation level (81 %) with core connate water data for this facial zone is calculated by Archie model:
 













		




	
               Fig. 9. Correlation of Archie model vs core connate water saturation data
2. The second model on correlation level is total shale model with 77 % of repeatability fig. 10 [8]:




Furthermore, there were other water saturation determination methods which correlation was poor:
	Simandoux model:       	
	Indonesian model:  
	Poupon model:   [7]
These last three models are not applicable for zone 2 and they weren’t recommended for this facial zone. Similar results were obtained from well ¹ 223.									It is proved one more time that these wells are located in the same facial zone and all matched models’ results in determinations all parameters are similar. 		
					
Net Pay determination
Cut off criteria calculations were conducted to identify net pay intervals of the formation and estimate average values of petrophysical parameters. This process includes figuring out critical values of parameters determined above such as shaliness, porosity, permeability and water saturation. The process provides to identify reservoir parts of the U13 formation.

 Water saturation cut off
Critical value of water saturation was identified due to constructing graph where relation of fractional flow and water saturation. First of all, fractional flow parameter is identified on the base of available formation data by the following equation [6]:

				 
       where Uw- water viscosity - (0.3 sPz), Uo- oil viscosity – 1.16 (sPz),  Kro- relative permeability of oil, Krw- relative permeability of water.									Consequently, one needs to build graph relation of fractional flow to water saturation fig. 11.	

Shaliness cut off											In next stage a critical value of formation shaliness was figured out from a graph of relation of frequency to shaliness (see figure 12 in appendix) To minimize dependence of this parameter on other parameters a critical value of this property was calculated in software Statistics.

 Porosity cut off 
There are several methods to calculate critical value of rock porosity. One of methods includes constructing a graph of relation of porosity data obtained from matched log to dynamic porosity which is ?Dyn=??(1-?-Swir) in fig 13 [5]

Permeability cut off
The last parameter which critical value was identified was formation permeability. The method which was applied to gain a result is similar to porosity determination. However, permeability data was used instead porosity values fig. 14. Having constructed the graph dynamic porosity constant 0.01 is selected and permeability value opposite of point of intersection with graph trend is fixed as critical value. Thus, parts of formation U13 where permeability values are less than 0.12 mD, they aren’t considered as net pay zones

Results
As already noted, the reservoir was divided into 6 facial zones [1]. Two wells were selected from these zones as reference wells. In the course of the calculations, it turned out that the set of correlation equations for each zone is individual. Let's start with the results from facial zone 2. Wells ¹¹ 220 and 223 were chosen as reference wells.
Shaliness
Volume of shale was determined in each zone by similar sequence discussed in previous chapter and the values were obtained as the result of calculations.

Table  1 The obtained methods for determining the shaliness with a high degree of correlation in each facies zone


No.	Zones	Wells	Parameter
			Shaliness
1	1a	202	VshGR
2	1a	208	VshGRSteib
3	1b	59	VshSP
4	1b	203	VshSP
5	1v	191	VshGR
6	1v	204	VshSP
7	2	220	VshSP
8	2	223	VshSP
9	3	197	VshSP
10	3	218	VshSP
11	4	196	VshSP
12	4	212	VshSP
										











Porosity
				
No.	Zones	Wells	Porosity
			
1	1a	202	Por_mineral (72)	WeffGR (71)
2	1a	208	Por_mineral (76)	DTeffSP (70)
3	1b	59	Por_hccorrect (69)	WeffSP (62)
4	1b	203	Por_hccorrect(72)	Por_RHG (68)
5	1v	191	Por_hccorrect(83)	WeffGR (71)
6	1v	204	Por_hccorrect(79)	Dteff_SP (73)
7	2	220	Por_mineral (85)	Dteff_SP (76)
8	2	223	Por_mineral (76)	Dteff_GRSTeib (72)
9	3	197	Dteff_SP (75)	Por_mineral (70)
10	3	218	Dteff_SP (71)	Por_mineral (66)
11	4	196	WeffSP (81)	-
12	4	212	WeffSP (78)	-
    Table 2 The obtained methods for determining the porosity with a high degree of correlation in each facies zone













    
Permeability
For permeability almost in all wells, a high degree of correlation is observed for the equation that was derived from the core data for each well.

Table 3 The obtained methods with a high degree of correlation for determining the permeability

No.	Zone	Wells	Parameter
			Permeability
1	1a	202	K_base (72)	K_FF  (65)
2	1a	208	K_base (69)	K_FF  (64)
3	1b	59	K_base (70)	K_FF (63)
4	1b	203	K_base(73)	K_FF (65)
5	1v	191	K_base(74)
6	1v	204	K_base(85)
7	2	220	K_base(76)	K_w (72)
8	2	223	K_base(75)	K_w (73)
9	3	197	K_base(79)	K_Tixier (70)
10	3	218	K_base(70)	K_Tixier (66)
11	4	196	K_base(89)	-
12	4	212	K_base(66)	-

Water saturation
In the course of the study, it was found that the Archie-Dakhnov equation shows a high degree of correlation with the values of the residual core water saturation. The second most important is the method of Simandoux for zone 1v














Table 4 The obtained methods with a high degree of correlation for determining the water saturation

No.	Zone	Wells	Parameter
			Water saturation
1	1a	202	Sw_archie (72)	Sw_Poupon  (68)
2	1a	208	Sw_archie (89)	Sw_Simand  (71)
3	1b	59	Sw_archie (88)	Sw_Simand (71)
4	1b	203	Sw_archie (81)	Sw_totalshale (78)
5	1v	191	Sw_Simand (73)	Sw_archie (66)
6	1v	204	Sw_Simand (72)	Sw_Poupon  (71)
7	2	220	Sw_archie (81)	Sw_totalshale (77)
8	2	223	Sw_archie (93)	Sw_Simand (86)
9	3	197	Sw_archie (86)	Sw_Simand (78)
10	3	218	Sw_archie (73)	Sw_Simand (61)
11	4	196	Sw_archie (91)	-
12	4	212	Sw_archie (83)	-


Reservoir determination
The results of the determination of critical values in each facial zone are given in Table 5 below. These values allow us to cut off zones of the formation that do not have reservoir properties. Critical values in two wells from the same facies zone practically do not differ, showing the similarity of these values among themselves. 		First of all, the formation is cut off by shaliness, then by porosity, permeability and water saturation. The critical value of the water saturation parameter represents one value for the entire formation, in the case when the value is less than the critical parameter, then that part is considered to be the collector.

Table 5 Obtained results (critical values) in each well

No.	Zone	Well	Critical values
			Shaliness	Porosity	Permeability	Water saturation
1	1a	202	0.32	0.12	0.08	3.5	2.0	0.73
2	1a	208	0.37	0.10	0.09	9.0	7.0	
3	1b	59	0.21	0.12	0.09	10.0	9.0	
4	1b	203	0.27	0.10	0.11	1.5	0.9	
5	1v	191	0.41	0.08	0.09	0.23	
6	1v	204	0.37	0.09	0.10	0.23	
7	2	220	0.21	0.13	0.11	0.12	0.45	
8	2	223	0.24	0.07	0.09	0.20	0.40	
9	3	197	0.26	0.10	0.08	0.65	0.10	
10	3	218	0.21	0.09	0.07	0.80	0.80	

Average value determination
After determining the zones with reservoir properties, the average values in these parts of the reservoir were calculated by the arithmetic average method. Only, the average value for permeability was determined by the average arithmetic method deduced for the fluid flow parallel to the layering.















Table 6 Average value of each parameter in reference wells

No.	Zone	Well	Average value	 
			Shali
ness	Porosity	Permeability	Water saturation	Thick
ness	Thick
ness	Total thickness
									
1	1a	202	0.19	0.18	0.14	13.4	1.9	0.48	0.39	5.7	6.3	14.6
2	1a	208	0.10	0.18	0.14	182	172.4	0.26	0.31	11.5	16.7	17.3
3	1b	59	0.12	0.16	0.13	86.8	49.7	0.46	0.52	3.8	8.5	11.5
4	1b	203	0.18	0.13	0.14	5.42	5.43	0.42	0.44	12.5	12.6	13.6
5	1v	191	0.32	0.13	0.16	0.4	-	0.53	0.54	7.6	6.7	7.6
6	1v	204	0.29	0.15	0.20	8.63	-	0.42	.0.30	8.2	8.6	18.5
7	2	220	0.08	0.15	0.16	3.4	3.4	0.38	0.40	15.3	15.3	16
8	2	223	0.11	0.16	0.15	15.1	17.4	0.37	0.36	18.2	18.2	19.2
9	3	197	0.18	0.14	0.12	3.36	2.93	0.44	0.44	7.3	6	7.5
10	3	218	0.13	0.18	0.22	439	452	0.2	0.78	6.6	6.7	11.2
11	4	196	0.17	0.14	-	0.37	-	0.33	-	9.1	-	17.5
12	4	212	0.19	0.18	-	2.93	-	0.38	-	7.9	-	11.2

Discussion											
A correct estimation of petrophysical parameters provides adequately identify stock tank oil initial in place (STOIIP) which is crucial parameter for any process. Moreover, petrophysical parameters of each facial zone of the formation should be estimated maximally correct which should reflect more close values of real zones. Accurate selection of petrophysical parameters identifying models provides to satisfy the requirement discussed in previous sentence.													One of the aims of the project was to show how inaccurate selected method may affect to petrophysical parameter and then change STOIIP value. As a sample one takes porosity average value of the well ¹ 208 from facial zone number 1a. As mentioned before, in during determination this parameter, 2 models were selected with the highest correlation levels to compare the average values which are obtained from these methods. Average value figured out from values of equation with the highest repeatability with core porosity data (76 %) is 18 %. while average value obtained from the second most applicable method (70 %) is 14 %. As the result, one can determine inadequate average porosity value in case the inaccurate choice of the methods. Furthermore, recoverable reserves calculated (with average RF of the field 0.37) on the basis of main method is 2,369,769.9 bbl for 1km2 area (near the well), while reserve determined due to secondary selected method is 3,624234. Thus, having chosen the second method instead the main one, one may overestimate the reserves by 1,254,465.1 barrels of oil, which by 52% shows an inflated reserve for 1 km2 of the area. This again proves that insignificant difference between the parameters obtained by different methods shows a significant difference in the values of the reserves. This may increase some uncertainties in calculating NPV from selling the recoverable reserve, also, in planning future development strategy. Similar calculations of recoverable reserve were realized for other wells and the obtained results are given in a table below:

Table 7 Obtained recoverable reserves of each well in 1 km2  the area

No.	Zone	Well	Recoverable reserves
(std cond.) bbl
			
1	1a	202	484758.1	540304.4
2	1a	208	2369769.9	3624234.9
3	1b	59	252484.9	912382.5
4	1b	203	2016066.4	2129955.9
5	1v	191	1080705.0	1011733.7
6	1v	204	735914.9	1302583.5
7	2	220	3166636.4	3268785.9
8	2	223	4047198.0	3854474.3
9	3	197	1296441.4	750693.9
10	3	218	1448245.5	410427.7
11	4	196	1032999.1	 -
12	4	212	1608089.5	 -


















One can see from the table above that reserve values received from 2 methods in one well vary significantly. Inaccurate selection of methods determination of petrophysical parameters, also undercount of parameter values variation lead to obtain incorrect STOIIP. Moreover, the less adequate STOIIP values influence on economic efficiency of the project as NPV also varies with reserve variation. There will be given some recommendations in next chapters to avoid this problem.   				

Conclusions and suggestions for further work
Summarizing the results of this work, the spatial distribution of petrophysical parameters, which depend on lithological and facial zonality on the example of the field K, was studied. To study this work, the productive layer U13 was chosen as the object of investigation. First of all, facial features of the deposit were studied, and also an analysis of methods for determining such parameters as shaliness, porosity, permeability and water saturation in 6 selected facial zones was carried out. Various methods were considered for calculating the listed above petrophysical parameters, which can give a high similarity to the core data values. Among them, particular models were recommended individually for each zone. Further, the degree of influence of incorrectly selected models on the reserves and their influence on the economic parameters of the deposit was assessed.					The work has an essential scientific and practical significance, since, lithological facial zonality can directly affect the volume of industrial reserves of any deposit. Therefore it is necessary to increase the type of measurements and improve them. To implement this action, it is recommended:							
•	Correct estimation of lithological composition of the rock;
•	Make special explore of the type, composition of shale in the rock;
•	Organize additional measuring methods to obtain more information:	

a) In laboratory [5]:
 	- Lithological and petrographic analysis;
- X-ray structural analysis;
- Tomography of the core.	
					
b)  Log measurements [6]:
	- Density log;
	- Nuclear magnetic log;
	- Micro imaging log.
 BREAKS HERE
For properly estimation of oil reserves in complex reservoirs, accurate calculation of reservoir characteristics such as porosity, permeability and saturation is necessary. Frequent interbedding of different lithotypes of rocks, as well as the presence of magnetic elements in them, affects the porosity and saturation prediction. The fact of the discrepancy between the calculated saturation derived from geophysical data and the recoverable type of fluid in the field X indicates the necessity for alternative interpretation methods usage to improve the accuracy of the forecast results. 
General field information 
The field X is located in the central part of the West Siberian Plain, in the basin of the Latitudinal Priobye. In administrative terms, the field belongs to the Surgut district and a small part (in the east) to the Nizhnevartovsk district of the Khanty-Mansiysk autonomous district of the Tyumen region. The main types of transport are automobile, aviation and railway. The aerodromes are located in Surgut, Kogalym and in the center of Nizhnevartovsk district. Large river ports on the Ob river located in Surgut and Nizhnevartovsk. In Langepas there is a railway station running from Surgut to the city of Nizhnevartovsk. The railway station of Kogalym is located on the Surgut-Novy Urengoy line. The indigenous population of the region, consisting mainly of Khanty and Mansi, engages in hunting, fishing, fur farming and animal husbandry. In connection with the development of large oil fields, the population of the region is rapidly growing, and the national composition is changing.
Lithological-stratigraphic characteristic of the cross-section
As a result of conducted seismic surveys at the territory of field X, it was concluded that the Nizhnevartovsk and Surgut vaults are connected by a bridge, a kind of "bridge", in the center of which the structure X was singled out. "Bridge" is a narrow submeridionally elongated structure of the second order, dividing the two largest structures of the first order - the Surgut and Nizhnevartovsk vaults. In the structural plan, the study area represents a sloping monocline, which sinks from east to west. The surface of this tectonic element is complicated by small in size and amplitude rare local uplifts, structural noses and shallow troughs and deflections.
Based on the results of the geological exploration work, seven formations of industrial importance were identified in the respective reservoirs. This work will be devoted to the interpretation of geophysical studies of the JB11 layer lying in the upper part of the Vasyugan suite. Cover for this formation are the argillites of the Georgiev suite. There are six reservoirs associated with JB11, all deposits are associated with the facial variability of the reservoir. According to the geological description, each deposit has its own OWC. There is no pattern in fluid saturation with respect to hypsometry, water-oil contact has a step-like character. Deposits of the JB11 layer are pinchout trap. The studied bed has a complex structure, due to the presence of:

	Oil deposits with different water-oil contact levels;
	The clay zone in the southern part of the study area.
The investigated layer JB11 is located in the upper part of the Jurassic system, it is represented by deposits of the Vasyugan suite. According to the lithological composition, the Vasyugan formation is divided into two parts: the lower part is mainly clayey, the interlayer of argillite with siltstone and the upper sand-siltstone. The mudstones of the lower part are dark gray, dense with thin interlayers of siltstones. The upper part is composed of sandstones, siltstones. Siltstones are gray, light gray, dense, strong, medium and fine-grained, clayey less often carbonate. The sandstone is light gray, dense, strong, homogeneous, micaceous. A foraminifer complex paleontologically characterizes the deposits of the formation. In the composition of the upper subsuite, the productive stratum JB11 is distinguished. The total thickness of the Vasyugan Formation is 75-85 m. One of the main deposits of oil in the field is associated with the upper JB11 layer. The cap rock of JB11 layer is the Georgiev suite which overlie to the rocks of the Vasyugan suite and represented by argillites dark gray to black to a varying extent aleurite, with inclusions of glauconite, slightly micaceous. The thickness of the formation is from 1 to 5 m. TVD of the top of JB11 formation varies from 2720 – 2810 meters, Bazhenov formation, which lies on the Vasyugan formation was used as regional marker bed, because of Bazhenov suite is characterized by a deposits of the suite are enriched with faunal remains of ammonites. The deposition of the Bazhenov suite is well distinguished by field-geophysical data. On the diagrams of electrical and radioactive logging they are characterized by high apparent resistances and sharply increased indications of natural radioactivity.
Field features from field and geophysical data
Most likely, these boundaries are associated with carbonate or clayey interlayers, which are difficult to catch with a low amount of exploratory wells. However, there is an example of different fluid saturation in neighboring production wells. Therefore, in the well 15, the reservoir, according to the interpretation of the well logging, has an aquifer characteristic (Rt = 2.5 Ohm), and 300 m away from it the well 16 has a productive characteristic (Rt = 5.6-7.6 Ohm). In well 4, drilled 750 m to the south-west of well 15, an oil inflow was obtained by joint testing of layers JB11 and JB21. Such a variability of fluid saturation at a small distance implies a sharp variability in the conditions of sedimentation.
In addition, rocks that differ in filtration and capacitance properties can create capillary screens on their boundaries, which cause different fluid saturation even within the same hypsometry. Therefore, in the northwestern part of the field, reservoir properties of productive rocks vary considerably. In the area of wells 6 and 7, the core permeability is 175-252*10-3 ?m2 with a porosity of 16-20%. This part of the field is characterized by maximum flow rates up to 194 m3/day through a 6 mm nozzle. In the wells of other sites confined to other facial sediments, according to core research, the permeability of the collectors rarely exceeds 20*10-3 mkm2. Here the inflows of oil to the overflow almost did not come out.
According to the cross section, the layer has high average net to gross ratio equal to 0.605. Effective thicknesses vary from 0.8 m to 22.8 m, with an average value of 8.6 m. The oil-saturated thicknesses range from 0.7 m to 18.7 m. The layer is composed of 1-4 permeable interlayers. The maximum number of wells, namely 72%, is composed of 1-3 interlayers.
Porosity determination
Within the initial data of the investigated field X, a typical well logging complex was used for porosity determination of rocks for calculating the correlation dependence core-well logging: the method of scattered gamma radiation (density log), neutron methods (neutron gamma Method - NGK), acoustic method. The methods have different physical basis and measured parameters of rocks and, accordingly, different algorithms for porosity determination. 
For the porosity calculation by Acoustic method, the elastic wave interval transit time is used, which is related to the porosity of strong cemented rocks by the Wyllie equation
?t=??t?_f•?+??t?_ma•(1-?)	(1)
Expressing the open porosity from this equation, we obtain
?_s=(?t-??t?_ma)/(??t?_f-??t?_ma )	(2)
Where ?tma, ?tf - acoustic transit time of the rock matrix (?sec/ft), acoustic transit time of interstitial fluids (?sec/ft).
By analogy with the density log method, these equations provide the determination of the total porosity. To determine the effective porosity, it is necessary to introduce a correction for the shaliness
?_eff=(?t-??t?_m)/(??t?_f-??t?_m )-V_cl  (??t?_cl-??t?_m)/(??t?_f-??t?_m )	(3)
Where ?tcl, Vcl - acoustic transit time in the interval of shales, and bulk shaliness calculated by the Larionov model.
As a result of porosity determination by acoustic logging, the best result was obtained in wells 7, 12, 6 and 13 according to the base Eq. (3), with the shaliness correction (Fig. 1)

Figure 1 Results of porosity correlation by acoustic logging
To calculated poristy by Neutron log, following formula is used to calculate the effective neutron porosity
?_eff=?_n-V_cl•?_cl	(4)
Where ?n - neutron porosity, Vcl - bulk shaliness calculated by the Larionov model, ?cl - porosity in the interval of shales.
The use of this equation gives a successful correlation of core - well logging data for wells 9, 14, 15 and 11 and the correlation results are presented in Fig 2.
 
Figure 2 Results of porosity correlation by neutron method

Hydraulic flow units method for permeability calculation
The main idea of hydraulic units method is to identify groups of samples belonging to distinctive rock types that are characterized by unique relationships between the capacitive and filtration properties. Such unique characteristics belong to the value of FZI that determines the relationship between porosity and permeability. Knowledge of the type of hydraulic unit allows to correctly determine the dynamic characteristics of the reservoir by changes in only static property (porosity). According to laboratory core data, these parameters were calculated for the whole core data for the investigated field. Then, using the calculated FZI values for each point of the array, a stratigraphically modified Lorenz plot (Figure 3) was applied that characterizes the conductivity distribution among the volume of rocks containing the fluid.
 
Figure 3 Modified Lorenz plot
 For this purpose, the filtration characteristic of the rocks - normalized cumulative transmissivity (kh) - was laid along the Y axis, and the cumulative storativity characteristic of the rocks (?eh) along the X axis. The places of inflection of the curve on the graph characterize the boundaries of hydraulic units, since within each of them the reservoir has close hydrodynamic properties. Based on the results of the construction of the modified Lorentz graph, 9 hydraulic units were identified (Figure 4).
 
Figure 4 Hydraulic flow units
From figure 4 it can be seen that each hydraulic flow unit has its own range of FZI values, as well as the average values of porosity and permeability which decrease in accordance with the decrease in the average values of flow zone indicator, also each hydraulic unit is represented by its lithological description locality different from the others, which was taken from the core description of a given field X. Since investigated field is characterized by heterogeneity of permeability distribution, it was decided to divide field on facies zones. By the Muromtsev method, namely, the behavior of the SP curve in the reservoir, as well as the geological description of the core, 3 facial zone were determined on the field X. Facies of bar bodies represented by coarse-grained, well-sorted sandstone, with the maximum effective thickness of the reservoir, in which the SP curve acquires a cylindrical shape. Facies of the slope of bar bodies represented by coarse-grained sandstone as well as medium-grained siltstone, the most coarse-grained rocks are observed in the top of the formation, then the grain size decreases, the degree of claying increases, the SP form becomes rugged in the bottom of the reservoir. Facies of coastal currents which are characterized by frequent interbedding of sandstone and mudstone as a result SP curve acquires a triangular shape (Figure 5). 

 
Figure 5 Facial zones selected at the field X
Through analyzed core data and the shape of the PS curve, the area of the investigated field was divided into facial zones, as a result, a facial map of the region was constructed (Figure 6).
The complex parameter FZI has correlation links with indications of geophysical methods normalized to reference sand and shale layers. The complex parameter is closely related both to the normalized net to gross readings by the PS method (aPS) and to the net to gross by the GR method (aGR), but the most informative is the multiplicative combination aPS · aGR.
aPS=(?PS?_log-?PS?_min)/(?PS?_max-?PS?_min )	(5)
aGR=(?GR?_log-?GR?_min)/(?GR?_max-?GR?_min )	(6)
Where PSlog - potential value at a certain depth, Psmin - minimum value of the potential in the investigated interval (“sandstone line”), PSmax - maximum value in the investigated interval (“shale line”). Similar notation for gamma log (GR).
 
Figure 6 Facial zones of field X
The revealed interrelations allow using geophysical methods for the direct determination of the hydraulic flow unit - the basic parameter of geological modeling and, therefore, to optimize the modeling process itself. In order to take into account the change in the features of the structure of the reservoirs associated with different facial environments, the original core data from various wells were divided into groups in accordance with the aforementioned facial zones, and plots of relationship between FZI and net to gross by the method of PS and GK, and product of net to gross by these two method were constructed for each facial zone (Figures 7-9).

 
Figure 7 Net to gross-FZI plot for coastal current facies
 
Figure 8 Net to gross-FZI plot for slope of bar body facies
 
Figure 9 Net to gross-FZI plot for bar body facies
Based on the results of the constructed relationships, high coefficient of determination of aPS-FZI equal to 72.9%, and aGR-FZI equal to 72.6% was obtained. However, the greatest reliability and practical usage represent the product of these parameters aGR?aPS-FZI with the determination coefficient equal to 75.6%. This relationship allows us to take into account lithological anomalies of each facies, which in turn will allow a more reliable distribution of permeability in wells belonging to these facies. To calculate the permeability of wells in the facies of coastal currents the equation obtained from aGR?aPS-FZI plot, represented in the figure 7, was used
y=0.1321?e^(3.2281?x)	(7)
Where y – flow zone indicator, x - aPS?aGR
Further, effective porosity values corrected for shaliness were taken from already correlated wells, discrete values of net to gross were calculated from two logging curves at the same depths in which the core was extracted in order to further compare the calculated permeability with the core permeability. After calculating of FZI, each value was substituted into the table in Appendix 3, which was constructed from the original core data. After the substitution, each value of the FZI corresponds within the range of values for a particular hydraulic unit, and the average value of the FZI for the given hydraulic unit was selected, which was substituted in the Carman-Cozeny equation
k=1014•?FZI?^2  (?_e^3)/?(1-?_e)?^2 	(8)
As a result, the relationship between the core permeability and the calculated permeability by geophysical methods using the FZI parameter with the coefficient of determination equal to 73.8% (Fig. 10)  
 
Figure 10 The result of correlation between core and calculated permeability for well ¹13
The same sequence for permeability calculating was repeated to in all wells in the facies of the bar body slope. However, this calculation could not be performed for the bar body facies, since within this facies there was only one well in which core sampling was performed and laboratory studies were carried out, due to a lack of initial data, the aGK?aPS-FZI relationship could not be performed. Drilling of additional wells is required, core sampling and laboratory studies to establish relationship in this facies (Figure 9). Results of correlation between core and calculated permeability are presented in Table 1.
Table 1. Result of correlation between core and calculate permeability
Equation/Well - result	¹6	¹7	¹9	¹11	¹12	¹13	¹14	¹15
FZI	75.8%	72.1%	76.7%	Bar body	77.1%	73.8%	74.3%	75.2%

Determination of reservoir saturation
Reservoir fluid saturation is the volume of pore space filled with formation water, oil and gas. Saturation is determined by the coefficients of water saturation, oil saturation and gas saturation, which characterize the ratio of the volume of pores occupied by a particular type of fluid, relative to the total volume of pores. The most complex is the notion of water saturation, since water can present in various forms: in the form of free water as a mobile phase capable to move in pores, in the form of bound water which cannot move in a pore space within the limits of achievable pressures. Bound water is formed in a porous medium due to surface-molecular and capillary forces and corresponds to the minimum water content in pure non-clay reservoirs. In clay rocks there is necessarily presence of water associated with clay minerals and forming part of the crystal lattice. Determination of water saturation in rocks is a task of primary importance because the volume of hydrocarbons in the pores will be determined as (1 - Sw).
Application of Archie’s relationships
Water saturation of pure clay reservoirs is determined by the Archie-Dakhnov equation if the following parameters are known

	Uninvaded formation resistivity Rt
	Porosity 
	Formation water resistivity Rw
	a, m, n coefficients characteristic of rocks
S_w=((a•R_w)/(?^m•R_t ))^(1/n)	(9)
It is known that porosity parameter if defined by relationship
F=R_o/R_w =?•?^(-m)	(10)
So the equation can be rewritten as
S_w=((F•R_w)/R_t )^(1/n)	(11)
It is obvious that the initial values must be determined in advance. Porosity coefficients were determined from acoustic and neutron logging, taking into account the clay content, n coefficient was calculated as a relation of resistivity index versus water saturation from initial core data, n and m coefficients were determined from formation factor versus porosity plot which was constructed from initial data too, resistivity of formation water was determined from Schlumberger cross plot book, Gen-9 cross plot. The process of obtaining constants for the Archie equation is presented in Figure 11.
 
Figure 11 Determination of constants for Archie equation
Resistivity of uninvaded formation is determined from the data of a set of electrical logs, taking into account the borehole effect and flushed zone. The Archie equation showed high determination coefficient between calculated and core water saturation for 1 out of 5 oil-saturated wells (Figure 12).
Figure 12. Results of Archie equation in well ¹9
?Alternative models of water saturation distribution
In the calculation and distribution of water saturation, alternative equations were used, such as 
	Simandoux
S_w=(aR_w)/(2?^m ) ((-V_sh/R_sh )+v((V_sh/R_sh )^2+(4•?^m)/(a•R_t•R_w )))	(12)
	Poupon
S_w=v(n&a/?^m •(1/R_t -V_sh/R_sh )•(R_w/(1-V_sh )) )	(13)
	Indonesian 
S_w=v(n&1/(((?^(m/2)/v(a•R_w ))+(?V_sh?^((1-V_sh/2))/v(R_sh )))•v(R_t )))	  (14)

	Waxman-Smits
	                 (20)
Where CEC – cation exchange capacity of shale, KD1 - 21.5 for metric units, KD5 - 46.5 for metric units, a -  tortuosity exponent (unitless), B - equivalent conductance of clay cation (mS/m), densMA - matrix density (gm/cc or kg/m3), F - formation factor (unitless), N - saturation exponent (unitless), ?eff - effective porosity (fractional), Qv - counter ion concentration (meq/gm), RESD(Rt) - deep resistivity log reading (ohm-m), RW2 = water resistivity at 77 degrees Fahrenheit (ohm-m), RW -  water resistivity at formation temperature (ohm-m), Swc - water saturation from CEC method (fractional), Vsh - shale volume (fractional), Rsh – shale resistivity (ohm-m).
According to the results of calculation and adaptation of equations, Indonesian and Waxman-Smits models showed poor determination coefficient between core and calculated water saturation correlation and distribution of water saturation in the reservoir with the interval of determination coefficient 38-54% that does not satisfy the conditions of application of these equations (Figure 13). 




Figure 13 Poor results of Indonesian and Waxman-Smits models
Simandoux water saturation model showed high determination coefficient in wells ¹6, ¹12, ¹13. Poupon water saturation model showed high determination coefficients in well ¹7 (Figure 14).
As a result, equations showed high coefficients of determination (Table 2) in the wells with core data. From the 16 wells considered on this field, 5 wells with core data were successfully correlated with the usage of above equations, 3 wells were water saturated therefore were not considered in this paper.




Table 2. Results of water saturation matching
Equation/Well-Result	¹6	¹7	¹9	¹12	¹13
Simandoux	88%	74%	70%	76%	81%
Poupon	82%	80%	66%	70%	74%
Archie	78%	69%	76%	67%	69%

Figure 14 Poupon model for water saturation calculation result

Conclusions
During the matching of reservoir properties, standard and alternative methods for calculating and distributing reservoir properties as porosity, permeability and water saturation were analyzed. Equations and techniques were used whose purpose was to correlate the core data, that is to plot curves that would reproduce the values of core data with the highest coefficient of determination, as well as the condition that the correlation between the core values and calculated values should exceed 70 %, It can be said that in all wells with core data this result was achieved.
For porosity matching, standard methods were used due to high determination coefficient between core and calculated values.
For water saturation matching, both the standard Archie formula and the alternative formulas of Pounpon and Simandoux showed high correlation coefficients.
During the correlation of permeability, it is necessary to note the necessity of using an alternative methodology of flow zone indicators with the subsequent distribution of facial zones at the field territory, since investigated field X is characterized by heterogeneity of permeability distribution. The methodology of flow zone indicators showed the most reliable results and the highest determination coefficient between core and calculated values of permeability, this is due to the fact that the net to gross-FZI relationship in the facial zones are very high, which ensured the most accurate calculation. Also, this technique allows to distribute permeability in wells drilled without core sampling with a high accuracy. To calculate the permeability at the bar bodies facies, it is necessary to drill additional wells with core sampling, since the initial data for the calculation of the net to gross-FZI relationship is not sufficient to calculate the permeability.



 BREAKS HERE
The purpose of this work is to identify the best type of horizontal well profile for hydraulic fracturing.
To conduct such analysis, it is necessary to compare the performance of drilled wells, to identify the parameters which affect the performance of production well.
The analysis was carried out on the wells which are located on Field “G”. 
The study revealed the following:
• Well productivity is affected by the type of well profile.
• For different geological zones, specialized well profiles are needed.

 Introduction

The analysis of the profiles efficiency was carried out on the basis of comparison of the rates of falling oil inflow.

 
Figure 1 - Comparison of wells by starting rates and rates of fall from the starting oil flow for an equal number of days by 77 wells.

The inflow was calculated for the deduced dependencies for all wells for 150 days, for example, and compared with the start. The 150 days period was selected, because the area has recently been drilled, and to cover the largest number of wells with a well-known history of research, this period has been chosen. An influx of oil after the stabilization of the dynamic level of fluid in the annular space was taken as the start. After the drop rates were set for all wells, they were visually described in the below drilling sections. (In Petrel sections of the well were considered, correlations of the nearest wells were studied). Profile fluctuations were considered (usually they are present if the best filtration properties go up or down, and during the drilling we are hunting for the best filtration and capacitive properties). Subsequently, the strongest linkages between the rates of oil inflow decline and the above-mentioned features of well profiles were investigated.

Correlation between well productivity and parameters was low.Therefore; the technique of multiple correlations was used by analogy with FZI. Instead of the HU curve, a search was made to determine the dependence of well productivity on a set of variable data.

 
Figure 2 - Definition of FZI connection from logging.
The equation for forecasting the average oil inflow for 150 days was obtained. The equation is the following.

Q(av)=(a*Leff.+b*G-c*wct%-d*layer(¹)*f+g       

The degree of reliability of the approximation is almost 0.8. The violet oval shows the wells that deviate in the forecast. After the first detailed consideration of these wells, the underestimated total proppant fracture loads were found. The proppant load on these wells is 60% of the average.

 
Figure 3 - Comparison of forecast production and real production rate

In addition to deviations in these wells, the forecasts for the three wells were incorrect. With rough incorrect forecasted production rates, three wells are located in the area of difficultly recoverable reserves with a high initial water cut of more than 86%. Hard-to-recover reserves refer to lower parts of the AC12 formation.

It became clear that one equation is incorrect for different geological zones. Further for different zones, a search for more significant parameters was carried out.

According to the collected data it was established that different types of profiles should be used for different geological zones. Two zones corresponding to the layers AC11 and AC12. Layer AC11 refers to a traditional terrigenous reservoir with a weak permeability from 2 to 10 mD. The productivity of horizontal wells within this layer (AC11) is most influenced by the efficiency of drilling inside the oil-saturated sandstone, the degree of opening of the formation along the vertical, the total proppant mass for all stages of hydraulic fracturing, the oil-saturated reservoir height, and others.In addition to the advantages of increased inflow, the inclined profile has a number of technological advantages:
	A gentle inclined profile is easier to drill (on loads) - the minimum risk is to drill not completely the well to the design end.
	The minimum risk of denial of the liner in the inclined profile.
	If the zone is poorly known and a sharp growth of the formation is possible, it is easier to gain an angle in the inclined profile than to catch up with the U-profile.
	In the U-shaped profiles, the liquid phase accumulates in the reduced sections of the profile (According to a study by Y-tools)
	In the inclined profiles, the entire horizontal section "works" (According to a study by Y-tools).

 The AC12 reservoir has a low permeability of up to 2 mD. The reservoir is undersaturated with oil and has a high initial water cut at lower absolute depths.The productivity of horizontal wells within AC12 is most influenced by the absolute mark of the reservoir, its resistance, the amount of sandstone in the section, and also the initial water cut in neighboring vertical wells.

 
Figure 4 - The best profile type is selected in accordance with the modernized equation for AC12.

Conclusion
The best type of profile for AC11 is falling, opening the entire collector vertically.

 
Figure 5 - The best profile for AC11.

There are risks for this type of profile - go to the bottom of the collector. Ways to minimize this risk - the construction of correlations in the drilling process to understand the current situation in the section.

The best type of profile for AC12 is matched by an equation based on the absolute marks of the reservoir, its resistance, the degree of reservoir opening and the initial water cut for adjacent inclined wells.

The proposed algorithm can be used for different geological zones.

 BREAKS HERE
The current state of the approach to optimizing the development of oil fields on the territory of the Russian Federation is the application by oil companies of commercial software complexes, which are a centralized database with the functionality of performing all kinds of calculations and forecasting.
The software package of PJSC "NC" ROSNEFT "is represented by the product "RN-KIN" in which monitoring of field development is carried out by constructing and adapting proxy-models (a simplified filtration model with automatic selection of the coefficients of the piezoconductivity equation), taking into account actual field data.
The object of the study is the central part of the V field. Over the past 4 years, a number of stimulations have been carried out at the region to increase the oil recovery factor, which did not lead to the desired results. The reason was the incorrect evaluation of input data when planning operations. Classical WTA is practically not carried out (due to losses on oil) in the region. However, all wells are equipped with depth stationary gauges, which are sources of valuable field information due to the continuity of records and the absence of a need to stop the well.
The purpose of the work is to identify uncertainties in the stimulations in the central part of the field V and their elimination by adapting the proxy-model of the U13 formation to real measurements of reservoir pressure using dynamic data analysis.
In the process of the analysis, the current state of the energy state of the field, production analysis and further adaptation of the proxy-model were carried out.
Interpretation of long-term records of TMS sensors was carried out in the Topaze software (Kappa), whose feature is the use of integral scales, which makes it possible to interpret continuous records as classical WTA.
As a result of the work, a qualitative response of the proxy-model of the U13 formation of the central part of the field was obtained; wells-candidates for fracturing were selected, taking into account the reservoir pressure from the adjusted model, and the economic effect of the proposed approach was estimated.
The proxy-model is built on the basis of a two-phase simulator as part of the "RN-KIN" which facilitates centralized work on the object. On the obtained proxy model, the potentials of wells-candidates for future fracturing were calculated, and the NPV from which will be 60 MM rubles. The adapted proxy-model allows estimating the cost of the planned stimulations on the basis of real data, thereby minimizing the costs of insignificant operations - the potential damage to the company from insignificant stimulations over the last 4 years of development is estimated at 63 MM rubles.

General information about the field V

The main part of the field V is located in the Tomsk region, its small south-western part is part of the Omsk Region. Economically, the area is poorly developed. The nearest settlements are located 70 km to the north-east from V field: Novyi Vasyugan village. Geological section of the field is presented with transgressive and regressive types of sedimentation processes. 

Oil deposits

Oil deposits are presented by layers U12 and U13. The layers are heterogeneous, not sustained in terms of thickness, lithology and facies, reservoir properties, productivity. The deposit belongs to multi-layer, oil. The main industrial oil reserves (more than 80%) are concentrated in the U13 formation, which is characterized by the distribution in its composition of different-rate, high-, medium- and low-permeable types of reservoirs. The U12 layer is represented as low-rate, low-permeable and low-productive.
A feature of the oil reservoir is the "abrupt" behavior of oil-water contact (OWC) with a difference of absolute marks up to 70 m. 

Field performance

The central region of the field is the most interesting from the point of view of carrying out future stimulations in order to increase oil production. The development of this region was started in 2000 y.. The development of both the sector and the field as a whole is represented by several options: joint exploitation of both layers of the deposit or the completion of the U12 reservoir in case of a decrease in the planned level of production along the well. Currently, the well stock is represented by the following quantity: 51 production wells, 23 injection wells and 9 wells in inactivity.
 	 
Figure 1 – Field V performance

To date, the central section of the field is represented by the following key development parameters: bulk watercut - 81%, average oil production rate - 27 tonnes/day, current hydraulic efficiency - 73%, average injection rate - 122 m3/day, and average liquid rate - 53 m3/day (Fig.1). 
In case of cumulative development parameters: cumulative oil production - 2.75 MM tonnes, cumulative liquid production - 6.46 MM m3, cumulative hydraulic efficiency - 108%, cumulative water injection - 6.1 MM m3.

Factor Analysis of conducted stimulations
This type of analysis was used in order to identify the effect of parameters of Dupuit equaition on final wells potentials in key of stimulation planning.
The main features are:
Time of well's launching is specified, liquid rate is changing upon pseudo-steady state flow regime – this value is «unsteady state coefficient». 
 	1
Due to low permeability and productivity of reservoirs in central part of the field, steady state parameters cannot be used for calculations [9]. 
To estimate the effect of PVT, parameters that are affected by water cut value are changing. The water cut value influence fluid's viscosity, compressibility of the system (rock, water, oil), formation volume factor. Effective viscosity of the liquid in reservoir conditions that assumes difference in oil and water conductivity is calculated in a way:
 	2
Total system compressibility:
 	3
Effective volume factor of liquid expansion:
 	4
The main equations of the method are listed above. Thus, one of the parameters of the Dupuit equation is fixed, another one is changing in order to identify the effect of each [10]. 
To summarize, parameters that will be estimated while FA, are PVT, WCT, Jd, KH, dP.
Analysis of conducted HF
For the period from 2010 to 2014, 3 large-scale stimulations were performed in central part of the field - hydraulic fractures of both layers for oil recovery increasing along artificial cracks. As a result, some difference was met while correlation of planned and fact parameters.
Table 1 - Plan and fact parameters of conducted HF
Well	Type of parameter	KH, mD*m	WCT, %	Skin	Pres, atm	BHP, atm	Qo, tons/day	Ql, m3/day
4965	Plan	11	50	-4.7	240	46	17	40
	Fact	10	35	-5	150	50	10.8	20
13405	Plan	17	65	-4.7	275	54	17.3	59
	Fact	24	63	-5.2	186	70	18.6	59
4975	Plan	19	40	-4.7	245	50	27.9	55
	Fact	19	38	-5.3	191	50	26	50
Figure 2 shows the parameters for well 4965, as well as a breakdown of the deviation from the planned increase on factors. A report on the hydraulic fracturing in both layers was also analyzed: technological problems did not arise during the operation; the planned volume of proppant was fully injected. However, the actual deviation from the planned production rate is -6.2 t/day. As the factor analysis showed, the main contribution to this deviation is made by the pressure deviation parameter - in this case, the reservoir pressure (Table 1). Obviously, when planning stimulation, the calculation of the potential of the well was carried out with overestimated reservoir pressures, possibly due to the lack of dynamic data for this well or neighboring wells.
 
b
Figure 2 – Factor analysis, well 4965
In case of well 4975, the fracturing on which was carried out in 2012 on both layers, the deviation from planned growth was no more than 2 tonnes per day. The planned oil production rate during the calculation of the well potential was 27.9 t/day. The conducted stimulation can be considered successful. However, according to the factor analysis (Fig. 3b), such fact parameters as pressure and skin factor vary significantly with the planned values. Mathematically, these factors level out the effect of each other on the final actual growth (Table 1), however, it is obvious that the data of the reservoir parameters should be specified in order to ensure the closest possible approximation to the formation physics with further planning of any operations in the vicinity of the given well.
 	 
a	b
Figure 3 –– Factor analysis: a - well 13405, b - well 4975
Well 13405 (Fig. 3a), was introduced with hydraulic fracturing, then in 2012, there was refracturing, which resulted in exceeding the plan for the increase in oil production by 1.2 tonnes per day. Consideration of the factor analysis on the well allows making a conclusion about the discrepancy between the real and the data put in the calculations: similar to the well 4975, the overestimated reservoir pressure is observed, as well as the underestimated value of the kh.
Analysis of drilling with simultaneous HF

For the period from 2010 to 2014, 3 new wells with simultaneous fracturing were put on production: 13445, 13385, 5345 - drilling of the southern and northern sections of the central deposit near the OWC contour (Table 2). Well 13385 was later transferred to the pressure maintenance due to low tonnage. 
Table 2 - Plan and fact parameters of conducted operations
Well	Type of parameter	KH, mD*m	WCT, %	Skin	Pres, atm	BHP, atm	Qo, tons/day	Ql, m3/day
5345	Plan	13	45	-4.5	255	60	22.8	49
	Fact	13	23	-4.5	255	64	30.5	47
13405	Plan	6.2	15	-4.5	270	60	15.1	21
	Fact	5.3	18	-4.5	270	47	13.2	19
13445	Plan	14.5	15	-4.5	270	60	37.3	52
	Fact	13.5	18	-4.5	270	56	37.4	54
13385	Plan	31	65	-4.7	285	65	43.5	147
	Fact	27.4	78	-3.7	275	53	15.8	85

Well 13385 was put on production in 2011 with a flow rate 15.8 tonness per day, while the planned rate was 43.5 tons per day. Well 13445 was commissioned with hydraulic fracturing in 2011 with a starting flow rate of 37.4 t/day, which is 0.1 t/day higher than the planned value (Table 2). From the factor analysis, the contribution of the parameter kh is clearly visible (an incorrect interpretation of the log data is possible) - a revaluation of 1 mD in the case of a deposit with degraded petrophysical properties is significant (Fig.4b).
The well 5345 was put on production in 2011 to seal the grid. As a result of the stimulation, the deviation from the plan was +7.7 tons per day. The main factor influencing this deviation is the lower value of the watercut (Fig.4c).
 	 
a	b
 
c
Figure 4 – Factor analysis for wells drilled with simultaneous HF: a – 13385, b – 13445, c – 5345.
The resultant problem of conducted stimulation operations can be presented as following items:
i.	main parameters which affect the potential are permeability and reservoir pressure;
ii.	in accordance with proxy-model technical description, reservoir pressure calculation is based on permeability map, which construction can be manipulated by regulation of reference well grid permeability values;
iii.	absence of preliminary production analysis resulted in incorrect planned parameters while wells’ potential calculation, the economics of which will be considered later;
Production analysis
Well 13445.
The well is located in the northern part of the central section of the V field. The well was put on production in 2011 with simultaneous hydraulic fracturing. The result of this stimulation was almost complete convergence between planned and fact oil production rates. However, the planned parameter kh was overestimated. The influence of this parameter on the gwoth is offset by the correction for the unsteady regime.
Figures 5 to 6 show the diagnostic graphs obtained as a result of analytical modeling, as well as the dynamics of pressure and liquid rates. Comparison of model and field data shows satisfactory convergence, the response of the model can be considered reliable. Absolute permeability was determined by stabilization of the integral of normalized pressure derivative and is equal to 1.1 mD. The initial pressure at the time the well is started is 130 atm.
A particular well model is represented by a model with a finite conductivity fracture in a bounded circular reservoir with constant pressure boundary (Figure 5a), so that the displacement is due to pressure change at the drainage contour. By the nature of the derivative pressure, the well drainage radius was determined to be 122 m.
 	 
a	b
Figure 5 – Production analysis for well 13445: a – Blasingame plot; b – log-log plot


 
Figure 6 - Production analysis for well 13445: production history plot (©Topaze, Kappa)
Table 3 - Results of dynamic data interpretation
Well/Parameter	k.h total, mD.m	k average, mD	Pi, atm	Skin	Geometrical Skin	Total Skin
4975	18.3	1.5	165.01	0.42	-4.91	-4.49
13445	9.54	1.1	130	0.01	-5.41	-5.40
4965	22.2	3.66	172	0	-5.35	-4.11
5345	9.73	0.97	173.01	0	-5.60	-4.80
The table above presents results of conducted production analysis in Topaze software for wells with dynamic data: 4975, 4965, 5345, 13445. Mentioned above specified reservoir parameters will be further used as a basement while proxy-model of U13 layer (simplified 2D filtration model) optimization.
Proxy-model optimization
Reliability of the proxy-model response is verified by convergence of calculated and actual development parameters: bottomhole pressure, production rates, injectivity, cumulative parameters. Figure 7 presents a comparison of the calculated and fact values of flow rates of liquid and oil, injectivity, cumulative injection and production. Figure 7b shows the decreasing trend of injection rate, highly noticeable from the beginning of 2013, which contributes to the reservoir pressure decreasing.
 	 
a	b
Figure 7 – Convergence of model and field data
The main indicator of the representativeness of the obtained proxy-model is the convergence of reservoir pressure measurements with the calculated one. The convergence of the two parameters is considered to be reliable if the calculated data falls within ± 20% of the actual measurement. Figure 8 shows a comparison of the above parameters before (a) and after (b) proxy-model optimization.
 	 
a	b
Figure 8 – Convergence of calculated reservoir pressure and measurements: a – before optimization, b – after optimization
Sampling is represented by 110 items. 91 items fall into the interval of interest. Deviation from the corridor of ± 20% convergence is represented by 17.3% of the measurements (Fig. 8b). The upper "departing" points are represented by producing wells. These wells are located on the outer and inner contours of the OWC. However, in the vicinity of the majority there are no injection wells, and those present cannot ensure the maintenance of reservoir pressure. The lower "emitted" points are represented by injection wells, the measurements of which show values exceeding the calculated ones. The discrepancy in the data may be due to the complexity of managing the injection wells. Within the scope of this work, auto fractures were set at the wells to maintain the reservoir pressure; from fixed parameters, according to the PC functional, is the fluid flow rate or bottomhole pressure. This features only locally solved the problem - in the zones, the production log tests for which clearly show a low injection rate and the absence of the pressure maintenance system as such. The increase in injection (the empirical coefficient application) in this case was not considered to preserve the model response to the behavior of producing wells. The problem discussed in this paper do not provide for a discussion of the above issue. 
Figure 9 shows the deviation map of reservoir pressures before and after optimization. It is possible to single out several zones, significantly different in terms of values - the south-eastern part of the region, as well as the isthmus of the region, the drilling and commissioning of which began in the last 5-7 years of field development (Appendix). Despite the fact that production wells are located close to the OWC contour, the reservoir pressure maintenance system needs to be modified - sealing the grid with injection wells or reducing the rate of withdrawal by producing wells - the optimal options in this case. The hypothesis of outflow of injected water into the boundary area is the only weighty explanation of the ineffectiveness of pressure maintenance system.
 
Figure 9 – Pressure distribution maps before and after optimization deviation (©Petrel)
Wells 4965, 4975, on which unsuccessful stimulations were performed are located on the section marked with a circle in Fig.9. The difference in pressures in this section reaches a value of 90 atm. Based on the above, it can be concluded that the response of the received model is correct.
Well-candidates for stimulations
In accordance with obtained pressure distribution map, potential areas for future stimulations were selected: in vicinity of wells, mentioned in table 4. Potential well-candidates for HF are presented with significant decrease in liquid production value and low watercut. 
Table 4 - Well-candidates potentials for HF
Well	k, mD	Well potential
		Ql, m3/day	Qo, t/day
13165	0.76	25.6	21.7
13405	0.95	6.6	5.6
4965	3.17	43.0	36.5
4975	5.42	49.3	41.7
4855	3.94	58.2	49.3
4665	2.48	77.6	65.7
Project's economic efficiency
To estimate efficiency of performed calculations, NPV (Appendix B) was calculated for previously conducted operations (table 5) and for potential future stimulations.
Table 5 – Net present value of previously conducted stimulations, 2010-2014 y.
Well	NPV, MM RUB	Q after frac
	Fact	Plan	Q after frac_Fact	Q after frac_Plan
4965	-13	2	10.0	17.0
13405	-2	1	13.2	15.1
4975	8	12	26.0	27.9
5345	34	18	30.5	22.8
13405	17	15	18.4	17.5
13445	48	48	37.3	37.4
13385	1	59	15.8	43.5
As it can be seen, company planned to obtain 156 MM RUB as a result of stimulations (table 5), company's fact profit is equal to 93 MM RUB. Thus, deviation from plan is equal to 63 MM RUB. In accordance with current pressure distribution, HF on wells 4665, 4965, 4975, 4855 will increase company's profit by 60 MM RUB.

Results and Discussion

Conducted factor analysis for wells with HF and drilling with simultaneous HF confirmed incorrectness of calculated well potentials for stimulation and specified 2 mainly affecting parameters: reservoir pressure and permeability. These two parameters are key features while 2-phase simulator calculations, which are based on piezo conductivity equation. 
As it was mentioned earlier, all current field development is based on calculations of «RN-KIN» software, the same as selection of stimulations for wells. Thus, the necessity of conducting preliminary production analysis becomes obvious, as almost every well is equipped with stationary depth gauge records from which can be used for reservoir parameters specifying.
Constructed proxy-model of U13 layer confirmed applicability of dynamic data analysis results application while model optimization process which can be seen in figures above. Thus, proposed wells-candidates can be considered as valid potential additional profit for company.

Conclusion

i.	Optimal technique for uncertainties determination – Factor analysis, which allowed to identify the effect of incorrect reservoir pressure and permeability.
ii.	Optimal technique for reservoir parameters specification – Production analysis.
iii.	Optimization of proxy-model for layer U13 is based on data from PA for production wells, fracture list for injection wells (auto HF).
iv.	The corridor of convergence includes 80 % of measurements of good and high reliability, thus, model's response can be considered as reliable. 
v.	Well-candidates for HF will increase company's profit by 60 MM RUB which can be considered as reliable result due to calculations performance on the basis of pressure from optimized proxy-model.
vi.	Optimization of proxy-model is viable from the economic point: difference in plan and fact profit from previously conducted stimulations is equal to 63 MM RUB.
 Suggestions for further work
The issues which are to be considered in future are:
i.	Conduction of dynamic data analysis (PA) in central part of central region of the field V in order to increase convergence between model data and production measurements in injection wells.
ii.	More detailed manual selection of auto hydraulic fractures' parameters for injection well stock (zonal).
iii.	A study of the applicability of the method for subdividing the region into waterflood elements in order to forecast and select the stimulations in accordance with the operational regime of the well with the assignment of empirical conditional functions for automatic calculations and prediction.
 BREAKS HERE
 
Today, one of the actual problems in drilling is preventing problems in the drilling process. Every year, oil companies spend tens of billions of dollars to drill wells. About 15% of this amount falls on the costs associated with the elimination of problems in the drilling process.

It should be noted that the drilling industry is constantly developing, introducing new technologies and increasing the efficiency of work. Over the past decade, such technologies as rotary steerable system, high-resolution logging, automated driller's panel have been introduced. However, the integration of artificial intelligence methods into drilling processes is still an relevant objective of research and technological development.

This work presents a method of machine learning such as gradient boosting for recognition and classification drilling problems while well drilling. This learning algorithm that, based on historical data about previously drilled wells, will classify drilling problem. Such decision support system will help the engineer to intervene in the drilling process and prevent high expenses due to unproductive time and equipment repair due to a problem.

Introduction

The development of neural networks and machine learning methods have provided computers with solutions to problems that previously were difficult to solve with conventional methods [1]. The implication of machine learning in the oil and gas industry over the past few years has increased significantly. In connection with the fall in oil prices, over the past three years, many companies have begun to look for ways to improve efficiency of drilling, minimize non-production time with the help of new technologies.

The requirements of the practice of drilling deep oil and gas wells require a wide range of requirements for the theory. In this case, the theory should be capable to define as a normal process, and at the time of origin, and during development, considering problem as an integral part of such processes. It is desirable that a theoretical description of drilling problems allows judging them not only at a qualitative level, but also quantify the interrelation of their essential variables.  Several years ago this tasks seemed difficult.

Existing work in the field of drilling proves the success and necessity of further studies in the integration of artificial intelligence methods to improve the efficiency of well drilling. This is using multilayer neural network modelling to predict nonlinear optimisation drilling problems [2]; application of neural programming method to predict possible problems that may arise when drilling wells based on information about oil field reserves [3]; used an artificial neural network to develop a program to optimise drilling parameters [4].  Dedicated to many works aimed at predicting the rate of penetration [5, 6, 7, 8]. 

However, among the existing works, there is little practical experience with problems in the drilling process. Particularly those aimed at recognizing and classifying drilling problems. This work is aimed at creating a program capable of classifying drilling problems. Also, this model can be used to learn engineer to clarify problems. The model was based on drilling parameters, such as standpipe pressure, input flow rate, hook load et al. After selecting the necessary algorithm of machine learning in the programming language Python, the program showed well accuracy in the recognition and classification of drilling problems.

Methodology

In order to create a program that classifies the problems in the drilling process, the main methods of machine learning with which the calculation will be performed have been selected. These methods have shown successful applicability for solving problems in various industries.

Logistic regression

The method of logistic regression is based on fairly strong probabilistic assumptions, which have several interesting consequences. First, the linear classification algorithm turns out to be the optimal Bayesian classifier. Secondly, the form of the activation function (it is the sigmoid function) and the loss function is uniquely determined. Thirdly, an interesting additional possibility arises, along with the classification of the object, to obtain numerical estimates of the probability of its belonging to each of the classes [9].

Naive Bayesian classifier

A naive Bayesian classifier is a simple probabilistic classifier based on the application of Bayes' theorem with strict (naive) assumptions about independence.

Depending on the exact nature of the probabilistic model, naive Bayesian classifiers can be trained very effectively. In many practical applications, the maximum likelihood method is used to estimate the parameters for naive Bayesian models. In other words, one can work with a naive Bayesian model, not believing in Bayesian probability and not using Bayesian methods [10].


Method k-nearest neighbors

The method of k-nearest neighbors is a metric algorithm for automatic classification of objects. The main principle of the method of the nearest neighbors is that the object is assigned to the class that is the most common among the neighbors of this element.

Neighbors are taken based on a set of objects whose classes are already known, and, based on the key value for this method, the value of k is calculated, which class is the most numerous among them. Each object has a finite number of attributes.

It is assumed that there is a certain set of objects with the already existing classification [11].

Decision tree

The decision tree is a decision support tool used in statistics and data analysis for predictive models. The structure of the tree is "leaves" and "branches". On the edges ("branches") of the decision tree, attributes are recorded, on which the objective function depends, in the "leaves" the values of the objective function are recorded, and in the remaining nodes - the attributes for which the cases differ. To classify a new case, you have to go down the tree to the sheet and give the corresponding value. Similar decision trees are widely used in intellectual data analysis. The goal is to create a model that predicts the value of the target variable based on several variables at the input.

Support Vector Machine

The support vector method is a set of similar algorithms of the form "learning with the teacher", used for classification problems and regression analysis. This method belongs to the family of linear classifiers. A special property of the support vector method is a continuous decrease in the empirical classification error and an increase in the gap. Therefore, this method is also known as the classifier method with the maximum gap [12].

Random forest

Random forest is set of decision trees. In the regression problem, their answers are averaged, in the classification problem, a decision is made by voting on the majority. 

The method is based on the construction of a large number (assembly) of decision trees, each of which is constructed from a sample obtained from the initial training sample using a sample with a return [13].

Gradient boosting

Boosting is a procedure for the sequential construction of a composition of machine learning algorithms, where each subsequent algorithm seeks to compensate for the shortcomings of the composition of all previous algorithms. Boosting is a «greedy» algorithm for composing algorithms (See Figure 1).

Boosting over decision trees is considered one of the most effective methods in terms of quality classification. In many experiments, there was an almost unlimited reduction in the error rate on an independent test sample as the composition was increased. Moreover, the quality on the test sample often continued to improve even after achieving an unmistakable recognition of the entire training sample. This overturned the ideas that existed for a long time that it is necessary to limit the complexity of algorithms in order to increase the generalizing ability [14].

 
Figure 1 - Example of gradient boosting [15]

Evaluation of the quality of machine learning methods

Metrics are used to evaluate model quality and compare algorithms. Before moving to the metrics themselves, need to introduce an important concept for describing these metrics in terms of classification errors - confusion matrix.

Have two classes and an algorithm that predicts the belonging of each object to one of the classes, then the classification error matrix will look like in table.

Table 1 -  Confusion matrix
	y=1	y=0
y/=1	True Positive (TP)	False Positive (FP)
y/=0	False Negative (FN)	True Negative (TN)

Here y/ is the answer of the algorithm on the object, and y is the true label of the class on this object.

Thus, classification errors are of two types: False Negative (FN) and False Positive (FP).
Precision, recall and F-score.
To assess the quality of the models used to classify the complications in the drilling process, widely used precision, recall and F-score metrics were used.
precision=TP/(TP+FP)	(Equation 1)
recal=TP/(TP+FN)	(Equation 2)
Where,
TP - positive observation, and expected to be positive;
FN - observation is positive, but it is predicted negatively;
FP - observation is negative, but predicted positively.

There are several different ways to combine precision and recall in an aggregated quality criterion. F-score is average harmonic precision and recall:
F_?=(1+?^2)•(precision•recall)/((?^2•precision)+recall)	(Equation 3)
Where,
? - in this case determines the weight of accuracy in the metric, and for ? = 1 this is the average harmonic (with a factor of 2, so that in the case of precision = 1 and recall = 1, we have F = 1);

the F-score reaches a maximum for completeness and accuracy of one, and is close to zero if one of the arguments is close to zero.

The sklearn library in Python has a convenient function _metrics.classification_report, which returns recall, precision, and F-score for each of the classes, as well as the number of instances of each class [16].

Given data

As initial data were provided reports on drilling 67 wells. Many of the wells have drilling problems that have led to rig downtime and loss of productive drilling time. The analysis of the total time spent on drilling all wells showed that about 10.33% of this time is an unproductive operating time.

It is worth noting that 10.33% is an important value, considering that the average cost per hour of drilling varies from 15 to 55 thousand rubles. And in this field there is a well in which the unproductive time is 50% of the total operating time.

The main causes of unproductive drilling time are shown in Figure 2. The greatest losses of time were due to rig downtime in waiting for contractors, equipment, waiting for work. Then there is unproductive time due to the liquidation of penalty (unscheduled workings, redrilling through the fault of the contractor, etc.). In this project, we are interested in the trouble (drilling problem) that arise during the drilling process. These include kick, loss of circulation, borehole instability.


 
Figure 2 -  Distribution non-productive time on field N

Wells with problems were selected and analyzed. It should be noted that out of 67 wells, 20 wells were drilled without expenses for unproductive time. The most common problem is the seize that occurs when casing runs down. It is worth noting that in this project calculations will be made with complications arising directly during drilling. Under this limitation, three wells fall. In which troubles arose during drilling.

For further analysis, all drilling parameters that were recorded for each well were considered. The analysis of the data showed that not all the wells from the whole sample have the corresponding amount recorded drilling parameters. Some wells recorded the minimum number of parameters. Would like to note that drilling reports were provided for 67 wells, but the files with the recorded drilling parameters were given for 78 wells. Therefore, 78 wells were analyzed. For a wide analysis of the drilling parameters recorded on the wells, all 78 wells were taken. It can be seen from Figure 3 that only eight parameters are the most common in all wells, which are highlighted in red. And these parameters will be used as input parameters for classification complications.

 
Figure 3 - Drilling parameters for wells

After the work done, for the three wells in which the drilling problems were plotted, the recorded drilling parameters were plotted. 

Well 1. When drilling 2493 m, the drilling fluid was lossed. The total loss was 55 m3 (See Figure 4). To eliminate the complication, the colmatage fluid was injected. The total time taken to combat the drilling problem was 27.9 hours. This well is one of those that did not record the all list of required drilling parameters.

Well 2. Drilling problem is associated with borehole instability at a depth of 2882 meters (See Figure 5). It can be noted that this problem is accompanied by steep changes in drilling parameters. In particular, the value of the hook load, rotary table torque, etc., steep increases. To eliminate this problem, the drilling crew spent 231 hours.

Well 3. During well drilling in the interval 239-263 m, the drilling fluid was lossed in a volume of 40 m3 (See Figure 6). 7.1 hours of unproductive time was spent on solve this problem. It is worth noting that the graph clearly shows that during the loss circulation significantly decreases the level of capacity 01.

 
Figure 4 - Well 1 - circulation loss
 
Figure 5 - Well 2 - borehole instability
?
 
Figure 6 - Well 3- circulation loss
 
Results and choice of algorithm

According to the algorithms of machine training given in the previous chapter, calculations were made to classify (forecast) the problems in the drilling process. For calculations, the Python programming language was used.

The percentage of training and test sample 65/35%, random state 42. The training sample is a sample based on which the chosen algorithm adjusts the dependency model. The test sample is the sample by which the accuracy of the model used is checked.

The data loaded into the Python software environment was loaded with a single data set, with a preliminary classification of the complications, for the subsequent learning of the model. As indicated, the training sample is 65% of the total data, and 35% of the data is used to verify the correctness of the model setting. The following drilling parameters were used as input parameters: • Standpipe pressure;
• Tank level 02;
• Input flow rate;
• Hook load;
• Rotary table torque;
• Rate of penetration;
• Weight on bit;
• Gas content.

As a result of the calculations, the following metrics were obtained, for the subsequent detection of the most accurate model. Table 2 shows that the following algorithms of machine learning have the highest value of metric: Decision tree; Random forest; Gradient boosting.

Next, we considered the number of correct and incorrect assumptions in the calculation of algorithms. Table 3 presents the case for situations where there are no problems, and in Table 4 the classification of problems. Right is the number of correctly predicted values; False is the number of misplaced predictions. From the data presented, it can be seen that the greatest number of correct and accurate classifications of situations is obtained using the machine learning method - gradient boosting. Gradient boosting allowed with a minimum of error to classify the complication from the available data set.

Table 2 - Metrics by model
Algorithm	Metrics (determination of drilling problems)
	Precision	Recall	F-score
Logistic regression	0.00	0.00	0.00
Naive Bayesian Classifier	0.03	1.00	0.06
Method of k-nearest neighbors	0.83	0.64	0.73
Decision tree	0.97	0.87	0.92
Support vector method	0.00	0.00	0.00
Random Forest	0.98	0.93	0.95
Gradient boosting	1.00	0.93	0.97
Neural network	1.00	0.53	0.70

Table 3 - Accuracy of prediction of a normal situation
Algorithm	Situation	Right	False
			
Logistic regression	Normal	3916	1
Naive Bayesian Classifier	Normal	2484	1433
Method of k-nearest neighbors	Normal	3911	6
Decision tree	Normal	3916	1
Support vector method	Normal	3917	0
Random Forest	Normal	3915	2
Gradient boosting	Normal	3917	0
Neural network	Normal	3917	0

Table 4 - Accuracy of prediction of a problem situation
Algorithm	Situation	Right	False
Logistic regression	Problem	0	45
Naive Bayesian Classifier	Problem	45	0
Method of k-nearest neighbors	Problem	29	16
Decision tree	Problem	39	6
Support vector method	Problem	0	45
Random Forest	Problem	39	6
Gradient boosting	Problem	42	3
Neural network	Problem	27	18

Then, input parameters were analyzed by significance category, weighting criteria for gradient boosting (See Figure 7). The greatest influence on the operation of the algorithm is "Rotary table torque", "Standpipe pressure", "Hook load".

 

Figure 7 - Feature importance for Gradient boosting?

The situation was simulated, when the drilling parameters were removed from the algorithm in turn by their weight coefficients from the smaller to the larger. This allowed to understand how many parameters at the input are needed in this situation for the correct operation of the gradient boosting. It has been established that when the parameters such as "Gas content", "Weight on bit" and "Rate of penetration" are removed from the model, the system classifies the complications with the same accuracy. With the further removal of input parameters, the accuracy of the algorithm begins to decrease. At the same time, the accuracy decreases as with selective deletion of one of the remaining five parameters or sequentially. Accordingly, it can be concluded that this algorithm in the event of an emergency situation, can classify drilling problems according to the available 5 parameters without loss of accuracy: 1) "Rotary table torque", "Standpipe pressure", "Hook load", "Tank level 02", " Input flow rate ».

Conclusions
Following the results of the work the following achievements were made:

1. Based on the literature review, a wide application of artificial intelligence in drilling is shown. From the creation of training 

programs to the prediction of the rate of penetration.

2. During the analysis of the initial data, wells with problems that were encountered during drilling were identified. To model the presented drilling problems, a model was set up.

3. During the analysis of the drilling reports, a list of the main parameters was compiled, which will participate as input for the model: Standpipe pressure; Tank level 02; Input flow rate; Hook load; Rotary table torque; Rate of penetration; Weight on bit; Gas content.

4. Of the eight methods of machine learning, gradient boosting was chosen. This algorithm showed high performance precision, recall and F-score.

5. For gradient boosting, the parameters that make the greatest contribution to the operation of the algorithm are established using the feature importations parameter. This is the Rotary table torque, Standpipe pressure, Hook load.

6. During the analysis of gradient boosting, it is established that in the case of removing parameters such as Gas content, the model continues to work without changing the accuracy of classification of drilling problems.

Recomendation

1. Although the ultimate goal of the work was to teach the program to classify the problems in the drilling process, in the future, it is necessary to consider the possibility of predicting the drilling problems in real time. For example, using time series. Such a model will avoid problems, preventing high costs.

2. In the future, it is necessary to train the algorithm on a larger number of data on wells with problems. This will expand the application of the program, and teach how to classify various types of drilling problems.

3. It will be useful to test the model by specifying not only drilling parameters, but also geophysical logging data, on the input. This will allow models to take into account such a parameter as lithology. Depending on the different rocks, the log data will show the different behaviour of the curves.

4. It is also recommended to use geomechanical parameters of the formation as input data. These data will allow predicting possible problem areas of the well in advance, prone to collapse.
 BREAKS HERE

Among variety of uncertainties inherent in creating the simulation model and providing input data for it, there is one that is usually not paid much attention to. It is the choice of a three-phase permeability model which the simulator employs to interpolate the two-phase relative permeability curves, provided as input data, into the function covering the area of three-phase flow. The reason behind this “negligence” is that actual three-phase experiments are needed in order to determine which model works best for the specific reservoir and fluid properties. Without these data, there are no criteria on how to choose the most adequate three-phase permeability model. Thus, a default simulation option is normally used.
In this study, two-phase and three-phase experimental results on core samples from Field X, carried out by a subcontractor, and a report on them have been assessed in order to understand how this result can be used to choose the most appropriate three-phase relative permeability model. Although, the three-phase experiments were performed according to a widely used in Russia industrial standard on relative permeability measurements, it turned out that these data provide little insight into three-phase behavior, because there are too few experimental points, and those points lie outside the area of saturations which is of the most interest.
Results are presented also for simulations on a sector model for Field X, and on a model based on a sector cut from a real geological model of Field Y. The simulated cases included depletion, waterflooding after pressure drops below bubble point, and cyclic water and gas injection. It has been shown that the shape of the kro surface created by different three-phase models does not affect significantly the numerical oil or gas production, pressure drop, etc.
Introduction
Most of the situations a reservoir simulation engineer deals with include three-phase flow. In case of an oil reservoir with an aquifer, even if a gas cap is absent, at some point reservoir pressure drops below the bubble point, and a third phase, gas, appears and builds up around high flow rate wells. In more common cases, a gas cap is present, and a prediction of gas breakthrough from the gas cap to wells is of vital importance. Another common example is water-alternating-gas injection in waterflooded reservoirs. In all these cases, three-phase oil, gas, and water relative permeabilities are required in order to simulate the three-phase flow through porous media. The data on three-phase relative permeabilities can be obtained experimentally, however, at a much higher cost than those on two-phase relative permeabilities. Besides, a single methodology of three-phase relative permeability measurements has, apparently, not yet been widely accepted, certified, and approved throughout the petroleum engineering community. Instead, authors suggest their own techniques, mentioning many difficulties of setting up such an experiment and describing how in their specific experimental facilities those difficulties were overcome, or uncertainties reduced (Maini and Kokal, 1989; Oak et al, 1990). So, the common option is to obtain two-phase relative permeability experimental measurements, and apply any of the common three-phase relative permeability models which allow obtaining three-phase relative permeability values as functions of two-phase relative permeability values and phase saturations.
Pejic and Maini (2003) reviewed relative permeability models reported in different publications. In their paper, they compared isoperms on ternary diagrams, plotted from published three-phase experimental data and from three-phase relative permeability models obtained by interpolation of the corresponding experimental two-phase data. In total, they verified eight different three-phase relative permeability models on three sets of three-phase experimental data. The authors came to a conclusion that none of the models could predict all of the experimental sets well. If a model yields an acceptable prediction for one or two of the experimental sets, the same model will show unsatisfactory results for the third one.
Shahverdi and Sohrabi (2013) performed a similar evaluation of three-phase permeability models, as a part of their investigation in which they evaluated the prediction capabilities of their own suggested model, and they also compared the predicted results with the experiments. The experiments were also performed by the authors. By contrast to Pejic and Maini (2003), in this publication the authors compared all the models available in the Eclipse simulator (Schlumberger 2011). The core experiment, as well as the simulation model of this experiment, was a cyclic water-alternating-gas injection into a core sample. Among the models available in Eclipse, there are two models that allow taking into account hysteresis. Overall, seven models available in Eclipse were evaluated against the experimental measurements. The reported results for them were not too much encouraging either: all the models either substantially overestimate or significantly underestimate the cumulative oil production from the core sample and the oil recovery. The model proposed by the authors, on the contrary, shows a very good result.  In their model, relative phase permeabilities are the functions of not only saturations, but also on the history of saturation in a considered computational grid cell; that is, relative phase permeabilities depend on which phase in the cell was decreasing and which was increasing. Also, the values of saturations of trapped oil and trapped gas (Sot and Sgt) are required which are the parts of a phase that turned out to be trapped and immobile as a result of displacement by another phase. These data are suggested to be obtained experimentally, or otherwise estimated, so they can serve as an adjustable parameter. In addition, the starting phase saturations, Sgstart, Sostart, and Swstart, i.e. the saturations from which the process of displacement started in the cell, are also incorporated in the expressions for the three relative phase permeabilities. Thus, apparently, implementation of this model in all the possible saturation paths would require a greater access to programming the code that is currently available in the most common reservoir simulators. As the authors acknowledge, their model requires further verification on other experimental data.
This paper presents a numerical study of the behavior of three models, Linear (Baker’s) model (Baker, 1988), Modified Stone’s 1st model, and Modified Stone’s 2nd model (Aziz and Settari, 1979). These are the models offered as standard options in the commercial simulators, ECLIPSE by Schlumberger, Tempest MORE by Roxar, and tNavigator by RockFlowDynamics. Baker’s model is a default option for Eclipse and tNavigator, whereas Tempest MORE offers modified Stone’s Model II as a default option. First, the available three-phase experiments were assessed; however, there were too few points measured at conditions when all the three phases were mobile, and those points all occurred in the area of 30% - 50% oil saturation where the measured relative permeability to oil did not exceed 0.08. These measurements could not be used to validate the interpolated kro surfaces, so, the performance of the models was only assessed by comparing the numerical results obtained from different simulation models with the use of Baker’s (linear) model, Modified Stone’s 1st model, and Modified Stone’s 2nd model. Both synthetic sector models and a sector cut from a heterogeneous geological model were set up, and they showed no practical difference in terms of flow rates, gas rates, nor bottomhole and resevoir pressures, resulting from the use of different three-phase relative permeability models.
Three-phase permeability models
The expressions for the investigated models are as follows.
Baker (1988) Model
 ,						(1)
where   is residual gas saturation in the oil/gas two-phase system.
Modified Stone’s I Model (1979)
 ,						(2)
where
  is two-phase oil relative permeability measured at connate water saturation,
 ,								(3)
  is three-phase residual oil saturation (can be estimated using different relationships),
 ,								(4)
 ,								(5)
 ,									(6)
 .									(7)
Modified Stone’s II Model (1979)
 .		(8)
Experimental Data
Three-phase experiments were carried out at different fractional flows, and the resulting phase saturations and relative phase permeabilities were measured. The values obtained are presented in Fig. 1. Out of 19 measured points, only 5 belong to the area of actual three-phase flow. These points were measured at oil saturations not higher than 50%, and the corresponding relative permeabilities to oil lie in the range of 0.03 to 0.08. The first 7 measurements are in oil-gas system; the next 7 measurements are in oil-water system. The relative permeabilities to oil in both two-phase and three-phase systems plotted from the tabulated data are also shown in Fig. 1. It should be noted that these measurements were performed according to OST 39-235-89 Industry Standard of the year 1989, which is widely used in Russia to perform measurements of relative permeabilities in two-phase systems up to present time. However, the standard was issued at the time when three-phase commercial simulators were not yet developed, so the oil relative permeability values measured at three-phase flow were only used for reference.
From the sets of two-phase experiments also performed by the subcontractor, there were chosen two pairs of curves, one in oil-water system and one oil-gas system, measured for core sample assemblies with similar absolute permeabilities. These curves are shown in Fig. 2. 
  
Fig. 1. – Relative phase permeabilities from experiments: the table with the measurements as presented by subcontractor (left) and the relative permeabilities to oil plotted from the data of this table (right)

  
Fig. 2. – Relative phase permeabilities from two-phase experiments: the green curves are the piecewise polynomially interpolated two-phase experimental data with more densely spaced discretization
From the curves in Fig. 1, kro surfaces were created with the use of Eqs. (1 – 9) (Fig. 3). It can be seen that Stone’s models predict a greater area of oil mobility than the Linear model. It can be seen that the two models differ significantly. The greatest difference lies in the saturation region where 0.05 < Sg <0.15, 0.23 < So <0.35. Stone’s 1st and Stone’s 2nd models yield practically the same surfaces, although this may be attributed to a specific shape of the two-phase curves employed for the interpolation, in other words, by accident.
     
   
Fig. 3. – Linear model kro surface created from curves in Fig.2 (top left). Linear model kro surface with experimental points plotted on it (top right). Stone’s 1st model kro surface created from curves in Fig.2 (bottom left). Stone’s 2nd model kro surface created from curves in Fig.2 (bottom right)
Thus, the only insight that the three-phase experiments bring is that in the areas where models predict zero oil flow, in reality there might be some little motion of oil.
Results of Simulations on Sector Models
Field X for which the experiments were carried out is a greenfield, and it has no gas cap. A simple synthetic sector was created to model cyclic water and gas injection into the reservoir through a vertical injection well. The response was observed from a vertical production well located 500 m away from the injection well. The sector model properties are shown in Table 1.


Table 1. – Sector model properties for Field X
Number of cells (i*j*k), units	47*80*62
Cell dimensions (x*y*z), m	1-25*25*0.5
Lateral absolute permeability, mD	200
Vertical anisotropy, fr. of units	0.05
Porosity, fr. of units	0.16
Reservoir pressure, atm	260.0
Bubble point pressure, atm	260.0
Solution gas-oil ratio, m3/m3	72.4
	
Hgas, m	0.0
Hoil, m	26.0
Hwater, m	5.0
Position of vertical well above WOC, m	4.0
Length of vertical well, m	18
Perforated length of vertical well, m	18

In Fig. 4, cross-sections of ternary array through the vertical wells are shown: after three cycles of injection, and after six cycles of the injection. The front of the WAG propagation is shown by a frame. Also, to the right of the cross-sections the filtered cells are shown with the filter set as 0.05 < Sg <0.15, i.e. in the area where the greatest differences between the Linear model and the Stone’s 2nd model were expected. These cells constitute only 2 – 3 % of the cells on and inside the front of the WAG.

 
 

 

Fig. – 4. Cyclic water and gas injection in sector model for Field X

As we can see in Fig. 5, the operation of the production well is not affected by the small differences in the front of WAG.

This result looked somewhat unexpected, and might have been caused by specific combination of pvt and relative permeabilities, i.e. mobilities of the fluids.
Another reservoir was considered, Field Y, also a greenfield. Conventional two-phase core relative permeabilities are shown in Fig. 6 in blue lines. The relative permeabilities obtained for Field Y by history matching for producing wells are shown in red.
 

 
Fig. –5. Behavior of the production well in WAG sector model for Field X

Another reservoir was considered, Field Y, also a greenfield. Conventional two-phase core relative permeabilities are shown in Fig. 7 in blue lines. The relative permeabilities obtained for Field Y by history matching for producing wells are shown in red. The red curves were used to create kro surfaces for the Linear model, Stone’s 1st model (Fig. 7) and Stone’s 2nd model (Fig. 8). Again, the most pronounced difference is seen between the Linear model and Stone’s 2nd model.
  
Fig. – 6. Relative phase permeabilities for Field Y

  
Fig. – 7. Linear model kro surface created from curves in Fig.8 (left). Stone’s 1st model kro 
surface created from curves in Fig.8 (right)

              
Fig. – 8. Stone’s 2nd model kro surface created from curves in Fig.8 (left). Difference 
between Stone’s 2nd model kro surface and Linear model kro surface (right)

A sector was cut from a geological model of Field Y (grid dimensions are 50 m x 50 m x 0.4 m). The heterogeneity of the model properties can be seen on cross sections in Fig. 9. The most representative well is Well 1 in the center of the sector. By July 2017, it had been in production for more than half a year.
 
Fig. – 9. Cross-sections from geological model for Field Y along Well 1

In Fig. 10 – 11, it demonstrated that despite the lowered reservoir pressure and liberated free gas present around Well 1, the saturation paths that water phase takes to go from WOC up to the well goes through Sg equal to 0.015, i.e. where gas is immobile. From the other hand, the saturation paths that gas phase takes to get from GOC down to the well goes through Sw equal to 0.2 where water is almost immobile. And overall, the combination of saturations in the bulk of the cells is close to the boundaries on the ternary diagrams (Fig. 10). Thus the interpolation of two-phase relative permeabilities to the internal area of the ternary diagram doesn’t play a big role, because, at least numerically, the bulk of the flow occurs at the saturation ratios close to the boundaries of the ternary diagram. Taking into account this observation, it is not surprising that the Linear model and Stone’s 2nd model again didn’t lead to significant discrepancies in numerical results (Fig. 12).

 
Fig. – 10. Saturation paths that water phase takes to go from WOC up to the well and gas phase takes to get from GOC down to the well (background ternary diagrams are taken from Pejic and Maini (2003))

 
 
 
Fig. – 11. Saturation cross-sections and kro values for the Linear model and Stone’s 2nd model at 
the time when water coning and gas cusping is being developed

 
Fig. – 12. Comparison of behavior of the Linear and Stone’s 2nd model on the original geological grid for Well 1, Field Y

Discussion of Results	
When this investigation was started, it was supposed that simulations will invariably show noticeable discrepancy between cases where different three-phase permeability models were employed. Extensive published studies on the topic of three-phase flow also supported this confidence (Pejic and Maini (2003), Shahverdi and Sohrabi, (2013)). However, after setting up first simplified synthetic sector models, then more complicated models based on real geological models, and running simulations on them, it was discovered that numerical results are very close to each other, and from the practical point of view they may be considered equivalent. Trying various combinations of pvt models and sets of two-phase relative permeabilities didn’t help to find a situation where the difference would be significant, at least for the three models that are offered as standard options in all commercial simulators. For the considered cases, it was established that, although the three models indeed resulted in different relative permeability to oil inside the ternary diagram, the saturation combinations in the bulk of the computational cells were such that on the ternary saturation diagram they all lie in close vicinity to the boundaries, thus the shape of the interpolated kro surface was not important.
In the case of simultaneous water coning and gas cusping this result is explainable, as gas takes its path to the well through the oil in the upper section of the drainage volume, and water attains the well in the lower section of the drainage volume. Thus, formally the problem statement is a three-phase flow, but the drainage volume is effectively subdivided into non-overlapping sections of two-phase flows.
Somewhat more surprising was the situation where reservoir pressure was lowered well below the bubble point, considerable amount of free gas was liberated in the reservoir, but still different three-phase permeability models showed no practical difference in the simulation results. First of all, the simulations showed that the liberated gas is not spread uniformly throughout the reservoir but gathers near the top forming a so called technological gas cap, which reduces the situation to the case with a gas cap discussed above. Second, careful examination of the saturation arrays and oil relative permeability arrays showed that in order for the gas to be mobile and form a gas cone, gas saturation of the cells above the well and up to the reservoir top should be approximately equal to 0.02 (the number may be different for other combinations of pvt and relative permeabilities), which on the ternary diagram of kro is close to the boundary of the interpolated area. Thus, motion of gas through oil and water saturated cells does not affect the values of kro in this area (as can be seen in Fig. 11).
However, the most unexpected result was that in case of cyclic water and gas injection the proportion of cells where the combination of saturations must lead to differences in relative permeability model predictions was tiny compared to the number of cells inside and around the front of WAG. According to the numerical and experimental results performed on core samples reported by the authors Shahverdi and Sohrabi, (2013), the difference must be very noticeable.
Summarizing all the above, it may be suggested that it is not that much a shape of the interpolated relative permeability surface that governs the three-phase flow, but more importantly the direction of saturation change and saturation history in the cells that play the key role in three-phase flow as Shahverdi and Sohrabi (2013) noticed and so created a three-phase permeability model that takes into account these considerations.
As a suggestion for future work, it is intended to set up a simulation model for a core sample, in laboratory units, as it was done by Shahverdi and Sohrabi (2013) in their work. From simulations on this core sample model, there should be identified the conditions at which the numerical discrepancies resulting from the use of different relative permeability models take place. Then a simulation model should be set up for the same reservoir and fluid properties, but in the scale of a field development. The conditions of discrepancy identified in the core sample simulation model should be sought for in the field development model. It may appear that the difference in the scale of the modelled processes results in different behavior of the three-phase system for core samples and for a sector of a field. And, obviously, a good quality three-phase experiment carried out according to such specifications that are useful for practical reservoir simulations could bring a very valuable insight to the investigated case.
Conclusions
•	Simulations of field development for two different fields didn’t show a numerical discrepancy resulting from the use of different permeability models (Linear model, Modified Stone’s 1st model, and Modified Stone’s 2nd model were considered, as they are the only options available in Tempest MORE and tNavigator)

•	The insensitivity of the numerical results to the choice of the relative permeability model was attributed to the fact that the combination of saturations at which the flow of the phases takes place is located close to the boundaries of the ternary diagram, thus the shape of a particular interpolated kro surface becomes unimportant.

•	Standard relative permeability models do not take into account neither the saturation history of the grid cell, or the direction of saturation change of the different phases (whether phase saturation is increasing or decreasing), however these conditions presumably take a vital role in the physics of three-phase flow.

•	It is suggested to set up a core sample simulation model, in laboratory units, and a simulation model in the scale of a section of a field, and investigate the difference in numerical predictions resulting from the use of different permeability models and different scales of the physical problems.

•	Based on the results of numerical simulation for a core sample and for a section of a field, it is suggested that three-phase experiments from a recognized core laboratory be requested and the findings from simulations be verified by the experiments.
 BREAKS HERE
Half of the world's oil reserves are in carbonate reservoirs, characterized by low oil recovery efficiency. On average, the recovery factor (RF) of oil is no more than 30%. To increase RF, methods of enhanced oil recovery are used. In this report, we consider the water and gas injection with alternating and simultaneous injection. The development parameters of water and gas injection (alternating and simultaneous injection) were compared with obtained during waterflooding technology parameters in order to determine the effectiveness of technologies.
The reservoir of field A considered is a fractured-cavernous pore. For this type of deposits, the following mechanisms of oil displacement from the matrix are distinguished: fluid expansion, imbibition, gravity drainage, diffusion. In this report, we analyzed the potential contribution of mechanisms taking into account the properties of the reservoir and fractures. Thus, it was concluded that all mechanisms, with the exception of diffusion, are manifested when water-gas injected is applied to field A. For comparison and the final choice of field development technology, first of all there were the best options within each method:
•	Selection of optimal capacity of injection wells for waterflooding;
•	The WAG ratio and the injection period of each phase for the WAG case;
•	Selection of capacity of injection wells and the proportion of gas and water in the flow for SWAG.
Then the best options for each method were compared. Analysis of the results shows that the greatest technical and economic efficiency is achieved with the option of simultaneous injection of gas and water into the reservoir. Consequently, this case is recommended for use in field A.
The next step considered examination of the influence of various factors on the effectiveness of SWAG injection: initialization time, type of wells and reservoir pressure at the beginning of initialization. The results of the influence of the initialization time of the SWAG injection show that it is preferable to inject SWAG at an early stage of development. It was also justified that the horizontal type of wells is recommended for drilling at the field.

Minimum miscibility pressure
In order to determine the type of WAG injection mode, let us define minimum miscibility pressure for injected gas (oil-associated gas) There exist various methods of determining this parameter. In accordance with GlasO calculation method, the calculations are given with the use of the following formulae (1 - 4). In order to perform the calculations, one needs to know gas and oil blend composition. The results of the laboratory tests were used as initial data.
     							(1)
z= 58.42													(2)
T=196.88 °F 												(3)
 
 atm = 46.35 MPa (4)
Minimum miscibility pressure equal to 46.55 MPa was also determined in laboratory studies. The initial reservoir pressure was 43.2 MPa. Based on the obtained calculations and the results of laboratory studies, it can be concluded that when injecting oil-associated gas into the formation together with water, immiscible WAG will occur. Thus, miscible WAG will not be considered further in this paper.

Mechanisms of oil displacement from the matrix
In order to determine which of the described mechanisms of oil displacement from the matrix (gravity drainage, imbibition, fluid expansion, diffusion) will appear in field A, let us perform the following calculations:
1) The necessary condition for gas drainage is that the height of the block (H) is greater than Z, which in turn must be greater than the critical drainage height (hcr) (Figure 1)
In accordance with the figure, the drainage condition can be written in the following way:  
  								(5)
Critical height:   									(6)
 
Figure 1 – Condition of gas gravitation drainage existence

Therefore, we have:   m					(7)
The block height should be bigger than 0.114 m for existence of gas gravitation drainage. The similar condition for the existence of water gravitational drainage should be observed with respect to capillary pressure that is minimally necessary to initiate drainage: 
  m							(8)
When running pressure build-up tests in field A, calculations to determine the size of field blocks were carried out. Dimensions of the blocks vary from 6.1 m to 30.1 m depending on the total compressibility of the system (Figure 3) 
Having analyzed the dimensions of the matrix blocks and the necessary drainage conditions for water and gas, we can conclude that since the dimensions of the blocks exceed the minimum required conditions, the gravity drainage mode will work in field A.
 
Figure 3 – Dimensions of the matrix blocks depending on the total compressibility of the system

2) Diffusion is controlled by the diffusion coefficient, which is very small at immiscible WAG impact on the formation. Consequently, this displacement mode will be run in field A; however, it is expected that its contribution will be insignificant. Thus, it can be neglected.
 												(9)
3) Expansion of the fluid is controlled by the compressibility of the matrix block and the compressibility of oil (3.10, 3.11) - this mode will be run when the pressure in the formation changes.
 			(10); 			 				(11)
4) Imbibition. The rock is oil-wet, at the same time part of the rock is water-wet. Therefore, the imbibition mode will displace oil from the matrix, regardless of the height of the matrix block. The coefficient of capillary displacement from the hydrophilic part will be 0.1 after analyss of capillary pressure curve.
Summarizing everything said above, it can be stated that in field A in the process of injecting oil-associated gas together with water, all displacement modes, except for diffusion, will occur. Based on the selected displacement mechanisms, we calculate the possible oil recovery factor which can be achieved in the field. 

Calculation of theoretical oil recovery factor using Lysenko’s method 
Final oil recovery of formations with the injection of only gas is much lower than that with water injection due to significant differences in viscosities and mobilities (50-100 times) in gas and water. Gas has a very high oil displacement coefficient close to 1 but a low coefficient of coverage of layers by displacement (0.2-0.3), which leads to the fact that the final oil recovery factor is about 0.2-0.3. Oil displacement coefficient of water is 1.5-2 times lower but the displacement coverage coefficient reaches 0.7-0.9 and the oil recovery factor is 0.3-0.5. The combination of the advantage of gas (high displacement ratio) with the advantage of water (high displacement coverage ratio or high waterflooding ratio) makes it possible to increase oil recovery by 1.5-2 times.
It is considered to calculate oil recovery factors using Lysenko’s method.
 1) First, let us consider the injection of water into oil formation, that is, the development of an oil formation by means of ordinary waterflooding. The coefficient of displacement of oil by water determined on rock samples in laboratory conditions is equal to 0.5 (water flood oil recovery factor = 0.5). Viscosity of oil and water in the formation conditions is 0.8 cP and 0.6 cP respectively. Density of oil in surface conditions is 850 kg / m3, oil volume ratio is 1.3. Density of water in the formation conditions is 1118 kg / m3. Thus, the coefficient of using mobile oil reserves and the estimated selection of liquid in fractional oil content of mobile oil reserves are determined by the equation:
 	 (12)		  		(13)
Where À is estimated maximum fraction of water in the liquid rate of a production well.
In order to transit to weight fraction À2 from calculated fraction À, it is necessary to determine the coefficient of difference between physical properties of oil and the displacement agent ?dif which integrally takes into account the difference in viscosity and mobility between oil and the agent in formation conditions, according to the following formula:
 				(14)
It is assumed that weight maximum water-cut is equal to À2= 0.9. Then the maximum calculated water fraction is equal to:
 					(14)
With respect to this, relative oil and liquid selections can be obtained using formulas 12, 13:
 
 
   				(15)
Without taking into account the effect of the well grid density, the effect of limited well life and reliability factor of the development system, the maximum possible oil recovery factor is: 
 							(16)
2) Next, let us consider the injection of gas into oil formations and the development of an oil formation in the gas drive mode. The coefficient of gas displacement following the results of laboratory studies is = Êog =0.9, gas viscosity ?g = 0.01 cP, gas density in surface conditions ?î = 1.2 kg / m3, reservoir pressure Pres = 270 atm, calculated gas density at reservoir conditions
 kg/m?								(17)
Coefficient of difference in physical properties of oil and gas in formation conditions
 	
Taking into account the obtained coefficient for several values of gas factor increment (?GOR), the following values were calculated (18-24)
a) weight increment of gas factor  						(18)
b) weight maximum fraction of the agent in the flow   				(19)
c) estimated maximum fraction of the agent,  					(20)
d) coefficient of using mobile oil reserves  					(21)
e) estimated relative liquid selection  ,					(22)
f) weight relative liquid selection in the fractions of mobile oil reserves:    (23)
g) recovery factor of formations    						(24)
The analysis of the results (Table 1) shows that even with an increase in the gas factor by 2000 m3 /t, the recovery with gas drive field development 0.2962 is significantly lower than oil recovery in 0.4117 water-drive development mode.

Table 1 -  The results of calculations with a change in the GOR (gas drive regime)
?GOR, m3/ton	 
A2	A	KSTOIIP	F	F2	Kog	RF
500	0.6	0.3750	0.0338	0.2718	0.27218	0.2783	0.9	0.2446
1000	1.2	0.5455	0.0653	0.2921	0.29356	0.3172	0.9	0.2629
2000	2.4	0.7059	0.1226	0.3291	0.34436	0.5911	0.9	0.2962

3) With alternating injection of gas and water, the coefficient of difference in the physical properties of oil and the displacing agent (consisting by volume of 80% of gas and 20% of water in formation conditions) is equal to:
 
 		(25)
Let us assume that the maximum increment of gas factor is equal to 500 m3 / t or in weight units it is equal to:    ton/ton
The weight maximum fraction of the displacement agent A2, the weighting factor of the agent (the ratio of water and gas weight to oil weight)  , weight fraction of gas in the weight factor of water-gas mixture  .
With the account to the above described, the following equation can be obtained:
 				(26)
As a result, we have the following formula for determining the weight maximum fraction of the agent 
 , where   						(27)
Using the obtained formulae (numbers), we perform the following calculations: 
 							(28)
 									(29)
 									(30)
 							(31)
 							(32)
  			(33)
 									(34)
 								(35)
 									(36)
By comparing the obtained results, we can conclude that the highest RF is achieved by alternating WAG displacement method (Table 2) 

Table 2 – Calculation results for oil recovery factor using V. Lysenko’s method 
Type of injection fluid	Recovery factor, fraction 
Water injection	0.395
Gas injection	0.237
WAG injection	0.518

History matching and sector selection 
A full-scale simulation model of the field is one of the initial data items for the study. Before simulating the options, it was necessary to assess the degree of historical matching of the model in order to reduce the error of forecast indicators. The considered model was matched with historical data with an oil production error of no more than 2% and an error in water production (water cut) of no more than 10%. (Figure 4), which characterizes the history matching as sufficient. Thus, this simulation model can be used for further calculations
 
Figure 4 – Estimated and actual data for oil recovery per day



Since the model is a model of double porosity and permeability, the calculation for 20 years of the forecast takes a fairly long time (more than 37 hours). In this connection, it was decided to proceed to the consideration of the sector model in which forecast calculations will be carried out. The sector was chosen taking into account the fact that the average parameters of the model sector (porosity, permeability, saturation) corresponded to the average parameters of the full-scale model. Thus, the selected sector shown in.

Water injection
At this stage, the development of field A is carried out by water injection. Therefore, first of all we estimate the achievable RF during water injection at the point of time when water cut of the product is 98%. Since in fractured reservoirs water breakthrough occurs along cracks and after water breakthrough into production wells water begins to circulate from injection wells to producing wells, it will be practically impossible to get oil out of matrixes. 
Consequently, at the beginning injectability of injection wells was selected. A series of calculations were carried out with a restriction of injectability of injection wells in the range from 300 to 4000 m3 / day. In addition, the limit of bottomhole pressure of injection wells was set at 640 atm to avoid injection induced fractures.
 
Figure 5 – Calculation results of injectability impact on RF

Figure 5 shows, the largest recovery factor corresponds to the option with the well injectability rate of 1100 m3 / day. With subsequent increase in the water injection rate, the RF begins to decrease despite the fact that the formation pressure is maintained better. This is due to the fact that with the increase in injectability of wells, faster breakthrough of water into producing wells takes place. The option with the capacity of 1100 m3 / day was chosen for further calculations and comparisons with other options.
 

WAG injection
In the previous chapter, it was determined that in field A at reservoir pressure immiscible WAG would be applied. Therefore, various WAG options were calculated. First, the WAG ratio was chosen; second- the volume of slug which is injected in one cycle. The WAG ratio varied within the following values: 1: 0, 1: 3, 1: 1, 3: 1 (where the first number shows the proportions of injected water and the second number shows the proportions of injected gas). As it can be seen from the calculation results (Fig. 6), the highest RF is obtained in the case of water and gas injection in the proportions 1:1. This is due to the fact that uniform strips of gas and water form in the formation and their breakthrough into producing wells occurs later.
Then the parameter of injected agent frequency change (WAG cycle) was selected. The largest RF was demonstrated in the option with a 15-day cycle (Figure 7) since small strips of displacing agents were formed in the formation.
 
Figure 6 – Oil recovery factor dependence on WAG ratio

With longer injection periods, continuous phases were formed as a result of which the displacing agent occupied a large fraction of the flow (due to relative phase permeability). For further comparison, an option with the WAG ratio equal to 1: 1 and an injection period of 15 days was chosen.
 
Figure 7 – RF dependence on WAG cycle (slug)

SWAG injection
The options of simultaneous WAG by joint injection were calculated on a sector model. First of all, the injectability of injection wells was chosen with the water - gas ratio equal to 1: 1 (the injectability varied from 300 m3 / day to 4,300 m3).
The results obtained were approximately the same as in the case of water injection because an increase in injection rate leads to a rapid breakthrough in the water-gas mixture to the production well. Based on figure 8, the injection well mode was selected with the injectability of 1500 m3 / day.
 
Figure 8 – RF dependence on well injectability with SWAG application

Secondly, the proportion of gas and water in the flow was chosen. The ratio of the gas fraction in the flow varied from 0.1 to 0.9. The injectability of injection wells was set at 1500 m3/day. The results of calculations are shown in Figure 9. When water-gas mixture is injected into the formation with a larger fraction of gas in the flow, the recovery factor increases but oil production efficiency per unit of the injected agent decreases; at the same time, the gas factor of the recovered oil significantly increases. The optimum fraction in the flow is 0.8 (i.e. the ratio of water to gas is 1: 3) since the gas factor for this ratio is relatively low.
For further comparison, the option with the well injectability rate equal to 1,500 m3/day and the water-gas ratio in the flow equal to 1:3 was selected.
 
Figure 9 – RF dependence on the gas fraction in the flow 

Compare options
By comparing the best obtained options of water injection, WAG and SWAG techniques, we can make a conclusion that the highest RF by the end of the sector development is achieved when SWAG technique is applied. Having analyzed the cumulative recovery of liquid and water, as well as the gas factor of the recovered product, we can say that the combined injection technique is optimal for field A (Figures 10 - 11). 
Having considered the section of the formation over time, it can be said that with combined injection of water and gas into the reservoir, oil is displaced out of the matrix and fractures more evenly since due to gravity, gas displaces from the upper part of the formation and water from the lower part whereas when water is injected, a breakthrough in production wells occurs and oil circulation along the fractures begins
 
Figure 10 – Oil and liquid production rate over time
 
Figure 11 – Cumulative liquid and oil production over time and oil recovery factor

Economic calculation. In order to choose the optimal development option, it is also necessary to take into account economic analysis. As it can be seen from Figure 12, the results of the calculations are shown the project with combined injection of water and gas into the reservoir has the largest NPV despite the capital costs that are required to build surface infrastructure.
 
Figure 12 – Results of economic calculation of field development options  

Influence of various factors on SWAG efficiency
As it was early noticed, various factors influence SWAG efficiency. Influence of such parameters as well injection rate, WAG ratio slag size and reservoir pressure was discussed in the previous chapter. 

Time of the initialization of SWAG. When studying the effect of SWAG initiation in the field, all parameters in the calculations were taken from the previously found optimal injectability rates of injection wells, as well as the ratio of water and gas in the flow. Thus, only the time of SWAG beginning in the field varied. Waterflooding was simulated before SWAG initiation. 
The results show that it is preferable to introduce SWAG at the early stage of development (Figures 13). However, it is worth noting that SWAG makes it possible to obtain sufficient technological efficiency from flooded reservoirs but with worse technical and economic figures compared to implementation of the process at the early stage of development. If SWAG is used from the beginning of field development, RF is 4.1% higher than with water injection. 
 
Figure 13 – RF dependence on SWAG initiation time 
   - only water injection

Production well type. In the fractured reservoir of type 2-3 (Nelson's classification) to which field A is referred, productivity of wells depends largely on how many fractures a well has tapped. The more fractures a well taps, the higher its productivity (Productivity Index). In this case, water breakthrough occurs faster. However, despite this drawback, it is proposed to drill horizontal wells in field A.  
Injection well types. In this paper, the position of the injection well relative to the formation was also taken into account. It should be noted that in all options injectability of injection wells was set at 1500 m3 / day (the optimal value adopted). The best position of the wellbore relative to the formation is in the center since gravitational separation of the phases takes place in the formation; gas moves to the upper part of the formation, water to the lower. (Figure 14).
 
Figure 14 – RF dependence on well positioning

Conclusions
This paper has analyzed the possibility of WAG implementation in field A. The average reservoir properties meet the criteria of WAG applicability in the field.
According to the analysis of mechanisms of oil displacement from the matrix, it was concluded that such mechanisms of displacement as gravitational drainage, imbibition and expansion of the fluid will be suitable for field A. 
The next step was to compare different development modes, such as waterflooding and WAG with combined and alternating injection. Combined injection of water and gas is the optimal option, both from the point of view of technological efficiency and from the economic point of view. The expected RF of the field sector at combined injection of water and gas is 40% and NPV is 511 mln. rubles. The influence of various factors on WAG efficiency was also analyzed. The results of the influence of WAG initialization time show that it is preferable to introduce WAG at the early stage of development. However, it should be noted that WAG is one of the few methods that allow to obtain sufficient technological efficiency from waterflooded reservoirs; however, technical and economic figures are worse compared to the implementation of the process at the early stage of development. If WAG is used at the beginning of field development, the analysis shows that the achieved RF is 4.1% higher than that with water injection. The analysis of the well position allows us to conclude that with drilling horizontal wells (producing and injecting) in field A, the largest RF will be achieved due to the involvement of bigger number of fractures and matrix blocks into the development process.
 BREAKS HERE
In this paper SAGD is considered as development method of the high viscosity oil Field X. Firstly, the reference review is made in order to understand the principle, physical process, and main mechanisms. Also as result of this stage, the potential limitations of SAGD application are obtained and base of analytical approach is chosen. 
After this, analytical and numerical calculations were made in accordance with Field X description. Since it was expected, that SAGD method is suitable due to Field X properties satisfy to requirements, the main part of calculation includes the search for optimal parameters, and explain the main parameters influence. As result, it was concluded, that optimal production well position is 5 m above OWC, and optimal distance between production and injection wells is 5 m. During simulation modelling 3 pairs of horizontal wells was considered at different relative well position. The highest RF and NPV are achieved by 75 m between SAGD pairs. To ensure a hydrodynamic connection between the producing and injection wells in the field conditions, at least 15 days of preheating phase are required. Justification of horizontal well length required economic estimation, after which it was concluded that length more than 500 m is preferred.
 During numerical calculation additional two SAGD types (counter and modified off-set SAGD) were considered in order to reduce capital and operational expenditures. The calculation shows that highest RF is achieved by conventional method while counter SAGD provides the highest NPV. Thus, both methods can be chosen to Field X development. The modified SAGD is characterized by lower RF and lower NPV so it is not recommended for application. In general, the SAGD method is characterized as effective method of Field X development and counter or conventional SAGD types are recommended to use.

Inroduction
Recently, prospects for the development of the oil industry have been associated with the development of deposits of heavy oils and natural bitumen. Close interest in the fields of heavy oil and natural bitumen can be fully explained by the gradual depletion of traditional light oil reserves, as well as the development of technologies for the extraction of "unconventional" oils. Production of unconventional oil requires an unconventional approach. Such oil field can be produced by mining field development, cold technologies and thermal oil recovery method. In accordance with the field location description, the application of mining field development of Field X is impossible since there is a densely populated area and an environmental hazard. World experience in the development of high viscosity and bitumen deposits shows that the most potential technology is thermal methods of oil production. Since in-situ combustion and cycle steam injection are not recommended to use due to low achieved RF and complexity of process management, environmental impact, and corrosion, it is necessary to analyze the possibility of steam-assisted gravity drainage application. 

Field description
The Field is located in Tatarstan Republic of the Russian Federation. Deposits of superviscous oils in the deposits of sand assise of the Sheshminsky horizon of the Ufa tier of the upper section of the Permian system are confined to the local uplifts of the 3rd order.
According to regional geology and core description, field X depositional environment corresponds to shallow-marine zone with the presence of paleodelts on the strongly eroded surface of the Sakmarian stage. The thickness of Ufa deposits on Field X varies from 6 to 116 m. The commercial reserves of oil correspond to Ð2ss2 sandy deposits taking into account structural cross-section, log data, core data and well testing results. The considered formation is laterally sustained and practically does not pinch out anywhere. According to the log data, porosity varies within range 23.0-37.0%, oil saturation is in range 54.5 – 83.7%.

Analytical calculation
Theoretical calculation of oil rate during SAGD
The oil rate can be calculated taking into account growth of steam chamber by the following method. It was assumed, that oil filtration corresponds to Darcy Law. Oil viscosity changes due to inconstant temperature. Pressure inside of steam chamber is assumed as constant. Therefore, it is necessary to determine oil viscosity dependence on temperature and temperature function in order to integrate the equitation to obtain total oil rate. 
During the process of steam chamber front movement, the steady state of heat flow appears: the intensity of heat transfer from the contact is equals to the intensity of the heat flow from the inner zone.
For the following data the base calculations were made:
 L =415 m, k=2.95 D, kro = 0.4 – average relative oil phase permeability, g =9.8 m/sec2;  =2.3*10-7m2/sec; m=0.334;   = 0.45; h =25.6 m; Psteam =1.4 MPa – steam injection pressure;   =920 kg/m3 at 90 °C;   =50 mPa·sec at 90 °C. The saturated vapor temperature will be about 198 ° C at the steam injection pressure of 1.4 MPa.
The kinematic viscosity of oil, as a function of temperature, can be found from the following correlation:
 ,  (1)
Roger M. Butler [1, 2, and 3] suggested the following relationship between the coefficients a and b:
à = 0.3249-0.4106-b, (2)
Using the dynamic viscosity value, the value of the kinematic viscosity can determined:
  at 90 0C,  (3)
Using this value, a and b coefficients can be obtained: à = - 4.424; b = 11.566.
Calculated viscosity values for the range from initial reservoir temperature to injected steam temperature are presented in table 1. The values are needed in order to use them further to obtain   value. 
Table 1 – Oil viscosity – temperature relation
T,°Ñ	8	50	90	150	190	200
?, cSt	27477	533	54	13	6	3

Value  =2.0 was obtained with the use of numerical integration technique. Thus, the rate of production well can be estimated:
 
Over time, front velocity reduces since the contact surface size increases at constant injection rate. Thus, the depth of heat investigation is as follows:
 , (4)

Steam zone radius
Let us consider the injection of dry saturated steam (with a constant mass flow) into a single well. It was assumed that the pressure in the steam zone is constant. Thermal loss through the top and the bottom of the reservoir is neglected. Under these conditions, all latent heat of vaporization will be expended on a steam zone creation. 
From this steam zone can be obtained:
 , (5)
Where qsteam – mass steam injected rate, kg/h; t -  steam injection time, h; cr –  latent  heat of vaporization, J/kg; h – Reservoir thickness, m; c1n - heating capacity of rock in steam zone, J/m3.
Since only latent heat of vaporization influences creation of steam zone, so specific thermal capacity inside this zone can be determined by using the following equation:
 , (6)

Steam zone area and thermal efficiency of process
 The calculation of the area of the vapor zone is performed according to the mathematical model of Marx-Langenheim [15].
In the mathematical model of Marx-Langenheim convective heat transfer and thermal losses in the vertical direction are considered. Thermophysical properties of the system (formation, surrounding rocks and pumping working agent) are assumed to be independent of temperature and pressure. The heater flow rate and its temperature are also assumed to be unchanged. Since the mathematical model of Marx-Langenheim envisages to use water steam as a heater, the temperature of the heated part of the reservoir is assumed to be unchanged and equal to the temperature of the injected heater at the bottom of the well.
The sensitivity analysis was fulfilled to for evaluate the optimal value of steam injection temperature, rate, time and dryness of steam.
The first parameter, which was changed, is mass injected steam rate. The analysis is presented on figure 1. 
 
Figure 1 – Steam injection rate influence
With increasing steam injection, the area and radius of the steam zone increase, but growth intensity slows down due to thermal efficiency decreases. It occurs since despite the fact that intensity of warming increases, the greatest influence is on formation thermal properties, which was described above. 
The influence of thermobaric conditions is presented on figure 2. 
  
Figure 2 – Injected steam temperature (left) and pressure (right) influence
Heater should provide high efficiency thermal transfer at low mass and volume rates, therefore lower viscosity value, higher density, high thermal capacity and high heat of vaporization. When pressure grows heat of vaporization drops significantly. Thus, thermal transfer capacity decreases. Moreover, the higher the pressure, the greater the influence. The same situation occurs when temperature of injected steam increases.
Thus, potential increase in injected time gives a larger steam chamber radius. However, the thermal conductivity of rock decreases or increases preheating time depending on its value. This can be concluded by figure 3.
   
Figure 3 – Steam injected time influence (left) and combination of pressure and time parameters (right)
The pressure and rate influence were estimated by analytical approach. Their influence on the viscosity parameter was studied. With increasing pressure the potential limitations are archived at 1.5 MPa. After this value, significant viscosity reduction is not observed. Also the growth of injection rate by more than 20 kg/h does not give large additional viscosity drop and potentially does not give higher oil production rate.
The combination of two parameters (time and pressure) was considered, the results are shown on figure 7. The best case (higher thermal efficiency and greater heated area) is presented. The analysis gives optimal preheating time range equal to 10-15 days at optimal pressure 1.5 MPa. 
Since the well length influence cannot be estimated by analytical calculation (there is straight-line relationship) in order to have a possibility of analytical and numerical comparison the oil rate was calculated per meter. The combination of all parameters gives theoretical oil rate equaling to 0.18m3/day/m, front velocity is 0.4 m/day and depth of thermal front is 0.83 m. The obtained parameters and values were accepted as input data for the first simulation model running: optimal placement of well above WOC equals to 3.8 m.

Simulation modelling
Simulation modelling was made using Tempest software. At this stage, reservoir description, reservoir fluid properties and adapted simulation model were accepted as input data. Then the Sector was chosen with reservoir characterization of main formation part. The model was modified to thermal model by key words. The main thermal properties of rock and fluids are described. The relation between oil viscosity and temperature is defined from the laboratory test. In order to have a possibility to compare similar data, that is used during analytical calculation, the same data is used in the simulation model. In addition, relation between water viscosity and temperature is described that was not considered in the analytical approach. During simulation modelling 3 pair of horizontal wells is considered. For each case the well tracks were created. 
According to the calculated optimal distance above WOC, the well tracks were created. It is assumed that in the horizontal location of the well, the z axis value is 0. Numerical simulation provides the calculation of three pairs of horizontal wells. It is a significant advantage since this gives interference of wells, that can also occur during field development. As it can be seen, oil saturation zones form accordance with temperature.

Classic SAGD estimation
Some models running were created in order to obtain optimal parameters of well and SAGD pairs placement. For each case new well tracks were created. Firstly, the distance above WOC was estimated. The cases with 2, 5 and 7 m (where 2 m and 7 m were chosen as critical position due to the recommendation for reservoir with thickness more than 20 m [22]) was considered and the result is presented on figure 4. Results of intermediate cases are approximated. When the production wells are set at 2 m above OWC, the wells penetrate the transitional zone with high water saturation, so the water cut equal to 98% is achieved early and recovery factor is lower. On the other hand, the well position at 7 m above WOC gives higher oil production rate, however, the Remaining Oil in Place is accumulated near WOC and so achieved oil recovery is less than potentially possible. Thus, optimal distance is 5 meters above WOC.
 
Figure 4 – Comparison of well distance above OWC
The distance inside the pair between injection and production wells was changed at 2, 5 and 7 meters. Results of intermediate cases are approximated Figure 5 shows that short distance between wells slows down the steam chamber growth. The initial water cut is provided by water saturation, oil-water mobility ratio and, in addition, steam breakthrough. When distance between wells increases to 7 m the lower hydrodynamic connectivity decreases so the water cut is provided by water saturation and water mobility. Thus, the optimal distance is 5 meters. 
 
Figure 5 – Comparison of wells distance injection and production wells inside the pair
The next significant parameter is distance between pairs. This parameter provides pattern arrangement and intensity of rock heating. The distance varied from 25 to 150 meters. The result of simulations is presented on figure 6. When the distance between pairs is close, early connection between steam chambers occurs. So, the smaller total steam chamber is achieved. In the opposite situation, since pairs are located far from each other, more time is needed in order to create total steam chamber. During this time water cut achieves critical value (98%), so, the significant part of oil reserves remain in interwell space (lower part). Thus, the highest recovery factor is achieved when the distance is 75 m. 
 
Figure 6 – Influence of distance between SAGD pairs
Next step is the usage of previous results in order to obtain optimal steam parameters case. Firstly, the preheating time was considered. The time ranged from 0.5 to 2 months and which is on figure 13. The upper limit is chosen due to the fact that after 2 injection months the bottom hole pressure limit (2.7 MPa) is achieved. The limit is selected taking into account fracture pressure of the caprock.
 
Figure 7 – Influence of preheating time on SOR and cumulative oil production
When preheating time is shorter but enough to create hydrodynamic connection between wells, the first produced 30 tones are achieved earlier since the production starts earlier. On the other hand, started oil production rate of longer preheating time is higher as during preheating time average overpressure around production wells is created. Therefore, increasing in time gives greater value importance. Also the SOR for long preheating time is lower and in an optimal range. So, it is necessary to perform economic estimation to make a conclusion.
Results of the study of injection rate influence are presented on figure 14. With the increase in injection, the oil production increases, but SOR sharply increases, which indicates the inefficiency of the process. At injection rate more than 300 m3/day the bottom hole pressure limitation value is achieved. 
 
Figure 7 – Optimal injection rate obtaining
 The cases with different well length also were considered. The comparison of recovery factors and effective oil rate are presented on figure 8. With an increase in the well length the RF increases as the drained volume increases. However, the efficiency of the well meter decreases. So, the economic estimation is also needed in order to obtain optimal well length.
 
Figure 8 – Estimation of well length influence


Search of optimal SAGD type.
 In addition to the classical method the modified off-set and counter SAGD were considered. These methods were not considered by the analytical approach as such methods are characterized by well relative position [21]. 
The counter SAGD assumes the location of wellheads at a distance of 1.5 km, thus, in case of cluster drilling, SAGD wells are located on different clusters. Such mutual arrangement of wells allows to create a uniform steam chamber due to compensation of pressure and temperature losses along the wellbore. In addition, this design makes it possible to simplify the process of well control, since one of the wells does not need to stop another one for workover. 
In case of modified off-set SAGD type injection well is located at equidistance from the two nearest production wells. The application of displaced SAGD potentially should reduce capital expenditures since the total number of injected wells is reduced. The well tracks for this type of SAGD were also created.
Comparison of the methods shows that the highest RF, equaling 0.452, is achieved by a classical SAGD. Comparison of SAGD types is presented on figure 9. The use of classical SAGD gives the RF the value 2% higher than the counter and 5% higher compared to the displaced type. On the other hand, increased total oil production requires more SOR. In cases of classical and counter methods, the nature of the distribution of steam chambers (in terms of time periods) is similar to the fact that the model adopts an anisotropy coefficient equal to 1.
 
Figure 9 – Comparison of SAGD types
In the case of off-set SAGD, the RF is lower, since the steam chamber does not have time to cover a significant part of the formation until the wells reach the shut off criteria. Residual reserves in all cases are mainly concentrated in the lower part of the reservoir. Thus, all three options have both advantages and disadvantages from a technical point of view, so an economic evaluation is needed to make a decision.

Rezults comparision
The value of the starting oil production rate, obtained by analytical calculation, gives an overestimated value in comparison with the numerical method. It can be explained that in the analytical calculation, parameters such as thermal conductivity, heating capacity of the formation system are assumed uniform and constant throughout the formation thickness, while the values of these parameters for each cell are calculated taking into account the saturation and porosity of the cell. This calculation potentially gives a more accurate value. Also, in the analytical calculation, the achieved minimum viscosity is assumed, there is no thermal loss, the entire thermal front reaches the caprock of the formation and ensures uniform heating. The named reasons influence the received result. 
It can be seen that the analytical value of the well position above the OWC corresponds to the numerical calculation, since the second last method defined a range that requires an economic evaluation. The preheating time according to the analyst is twice shorter, since the thermal losses in the formation are not taken into account, steam-finger phenomena are not taken into account too. For the same reason, the optimal injection temperature is 100 ° C, which is much lower than actually required. 
The injection pressure obtained from the model is lower by 25%. One of the reasons for the discrepancy between the results is that the model takes into account the heterogeneity in permeability and, as a consequence, the injectivity along the length of the well. 
Thus, analytical calculations do not take into account a number of processes occurring in the formation during steam injection. The analytical approach can be used in order to estimate the expected oil production rate and required injection steam pressure values in the first place.

Conclusion and recommendation for furthure work
During the literature review, analytical calculations and modeling of the field sector, it was revealed that the considered classical SAGD method provides RF equaling 45.2%; Counter SAGD - 43.0% and modified offset SAGD - 40.2%. Obtained results characterize the method as technologically suitable and effective for the development of field X.
Calculations show that the choice of parameters of injected steam significantly influences process efficiency. To ensure a hydrodynamic connection between the producing and injection wells in the field conditions, at least 15 days of preheating phase are required. The optimal injection pressure of steam is 1.2MPa, which ensures the maintenance of reservoir pressure, uniform growth of the steam chamber, and does not allow to reach the fracturing pressure of the formation caprock. The highest RF is achieved while maintaining the dryness of steam at a level of 0.9 and the temperature of 200°C. As the pressure and injection temperatures increase, the efficiency of the process decreases.
The calculations allow to conclude that there is a relationship between the position of the SAGD pair relative to the OWC, relative to each other and between the producing and injection wells. The choice of these parameters influence the water cut of the production, the produced oil viscosity in the reservoir conditions, the oil production rate and, as a consequence, the achieved RF. The optimal ones are 5 m from the OWC, 5 meters between the wells inside the pair and 75 meters between the pairs. The distance between the pairs is based on the radius of the vapor zone, and the distance between the production and the injection wells is justified by water cut and the growth of the steam chamber.
It may be concluded that counter and conventional SAGD can be both recommended to application. 
Applicability of the method is considered on the sector model. Thus, the first recommendation is the extension to the full simulation model of the field. It is expected that the values of the optimally chosen parameters will change. 
 BREAKS HERE
In this paper field C, located in the Central part of the Russian Federation is considered. The several exploratory wells were drilled in the 1970s and subsequently abandoned. There is uncertainty in the STOIIP due to insufficient amount of information about the geological structure of the reservoir and petrophysical parameters. The work demonstrates the approach of the probabilistic assessment of oil reserves on the basis of data obtained in exploration wells and based on the data of fields-analogues. In addition, the most significant parameter affecting the reserves was determined. Based on the variations of the calculated reserves and the presence of geological uncertainty the several strategies of drilling considered. Two strategies are considered: basic – based on the maximum expected NPV and alternative – based on VOI.

Introduction 

The planning process of drilling new wells and sidetracks accompanied by a number of geological uncertainties and risks that need to be considered to assess the success of activities. From the point of view of optimal development strategies for the asset required to drill wells to maximize production or ensure the profitability of the project. The decision on the choice of target drilling suggests geological and economic justification of activities. The selection of priority goals, in the face of substantial uncertainty is complex task [1]. 
The main uncertainties are the initial reserves (values of porosity, oil saturation, target area are not defined precisely) and reservoir properties, such as permeability of the oilfield. Consequently, there are risks to achieving the planned NPV after the drilling of each subsequent well. 
In connection with the presence of uncertainty in parameter estimates, the attempts of geological structure forecasting and reserves of hydrocarbons are difficult. The causes of ambiguities in predictions associated with the following factors [2]:
	incompleteness of initial information
	the inaccuracy of the received information
	the randomness of the geological environment
The literature presents a wide range of publications, in particular [5] on the assessment of the uncertainty in the oil and gas sector in the planning of drilling wells. Most common are approaches, based on Monte Carlo simulations, Latin hypercube method and construction of tornado plots.
Monte Carlo method is one of the main analytical tools for risk analysis.  Its direct objective is always to estimate the range of parameters (reserves, flowrates, NPV). Every program MC performs a series of similar tests, and in one run it evaluates the parameters or the desired distributions for given input data - set on geological and engineering parameters of the problem.
Probabilistic method, based on Monte Carlo can be used to determine initial values of STOIIP: P10, P50 and P90 values. 
After determination of initial values of STOIIP it is necessary to find the optimal drilling sequence under the presence of geological uncertainties. The key is to find a balance between costs and revenues that maximize the NPV of the project. However, due to the presence of geological uncertainties, production profiles for every well and oilfield in general can vary in wide ranges and finally cash flow also varies. 

	Field C description
The studied Field C located in central part of Russia. Field area is poorly studied by seismic. In the period 1976-1977 several exploration wells were drilled in the area and were subsequently abandoned due to its location in the environmental area. Therefore, wells weren’t been in production. Location of exploration wells presented on figure 1. 

 
Figure 1 - Initial information about field C

On considered area within oil-saturated contour as it shown on figure 1 only 2 wells were drilled. Total number of exploration wells in considered area is 4. 
Productive formations are the deposition of terrigenous complex of lower Carboniferous. Schematic geologic profile is presented on the figure 2. 
As shown on figure 2 four individual layers are allocated within considered field C: CI, CIV (includes CIV0 and CIV), CV and CVI. 
OWC wasn’t penetrated in formations CI and CVI, formation CV doesn’t have OWC, CVI – penetrated by well W3.
   There is the variation of OWC for formation CI (14m) because well W3 was drilled in net oil zone and well W4 was drilled in water zone. In formation CIV situation is similar: wells W2 and W3 penetrated net oil zone, but well W1 penetrated water zone. So, variation in OWC in this case is 15 m. 

 
Figure 2 - Geologic profile of oilfield C


	The main uncertainties of field C and STOIIP determination
As it was shown on the previous chapter, information about oilfield C was obtained only from 4 exploration wells. The distance between wells 2-3 km, therefore information characterizes only small part of the total volume of formations. 
Geological uncertainties affect on the value of STOIIP:
	GRV uncertainties
	Porosity uncertainties
	Saturation 
	Formation volume factor
GRV uncertainties

GRV – volume, enclosed between OWC and the top of formation. As noted above, the OWC was opened only in formation CVI, there is the uncertainty in the GRV in formations CI and CIV due to differences in OWC 14 and 15 m respectively. Thickness of the layer CI in the direction from North-West to South-East reduced, which may indicate a possible thinning of the stratum, but the line of seepage is outside the license boundaries and distance to it is not known. In the direction from South to North marked the raising of the structure, and we can make assumption about the form of the anticlinal formation. Due to variations of OWC from -1174 (LKO) up to -1188 (Spill point) GRV of formation CI may vary from 3.9 up to 15.7 MM m3.
Formation CIV has uniform thicknesses in the direction from North-West to South-East and the formation is restricted to the license boundary. In the direction from South to North by analogy with the formation CI we can make the assumption about anticline structure of the reservoir, limited the by OWC. Due to variations of OWC from -1185 (LKO) up to -1200 (Spill point) GRV of formation CIV may vary from 3.1 up to 14 MM m3.
Formation CV has uncertainty in GRV due to the absence of information about the size of a sand body (seepage of reservoir). Based on the data obtained by exploration wells, as well as the relatively small size of this reservoir in the adjacent fields – analogues, we obtain the following variation in GRV from 0.5 up to 2 MM m3.
Formation ÑVI also has a small size in the adjacent fields-analogues, in addition, OWC was opened for this layer, therefore, the distribution of GRV is following: from 0.66 to 3.53 MM m3.
The distributions of GRV for all formations are presented in figure 3.
 
Figure 3 – GRV distributions for CI, CIV, CV and CVI formations

The distribution type was chosen as triangular as there is no accurate information on the nature of the distribution, conditional OWC for CI and CIV was selected in the middle between the LKO and Spill point.

Porosity uncertainties

Information about porosity was obtained only from 2 exploration wells drilled within the contour of oil-bearing, in addition, the core sample was selected only in one well W3. This information is extremely insufficient for the distribution of porosity within the entire field, so it was decided to use data from the adjacent fields (analogues). 
Field analogue was chosen on the basis of similar geological depositional conditions, close location and similar PVT properties. After analyzing, field X was selected as an analogue. It is located the close to Field C. 
On the basis of geological and physical properties of the field X, distributions of porosity were built for each of the layers, presented on Appendix 6.


Saturation uncertainties

Distribution of oil saturation was also selected on the basis of the data from analogue field. On the basis of geological and physical properties of the field X, distributions of saturation were built for each of the layers, presented on Appendix 7. 
Generation of distributions was also conducted in the software product Crystal Ball based on the field data X (the number of So is less than the porosity – about 500). For formations CI, CIV, CVI Weibull distribution was the most appropriate, for CV - normal.

Formation volume factor and NTG

 Distribution by NTG was not built due to lack of input information, so the average values of NTG from oilfield-analogue were used in STOIIP calculation. Distributions of formation volume factor are presented for each formation in the Appendix 8. Formation volume factor may have different values due to change of GOR. Distributions were built on the basis of data from oilfield C and X. 

	STOIIP determination
On the basis of distributions of input data, the quantitative assessment of STOIIP based on the method of Monte Carlo was conducted.
The histograms with STOIIP were constructed on Crystal Ball software and for every formation are presented in figure 4.
 
Figure 4 – STOIIP (MM m3) distributions

As can be seen from figure 4, formations CI and CIV contain the largest amount of STOIIP. Table 1 presents the distribution of reserves P10 (the least likely), P50 and P90 (most likely) for each of the layers.

Table 1 – P90, P50 and P10 STOIIP distributions
	STOIIP, MM m3
Formation	P90	P50	P10
CI	0.75	1.23	1.95
CIV	0.49	1.19	2.13
CV	0.09	0.13	0.22
CVI	0.13	0.24	0.44
Total	1.46	2.79	4.74

The most probable value of STOIIP is 2.79 million tons, however, depending on changes of initial parameters variation of reserves is high enough. Due to the presence of uncertainty in the value of stocks, there are risks of unsuccessful drilling in the fields

	Sensitivity analysis
Due to the presence of uncertainty in parameters affecting the value of STOIIP, sensitivity analysis was conducted to determine the most influencing parameter. Figure 5 shows the Tornado Plot for the main layers CI and CIV. 

 
Figure 5 – Tornado plots for CI and CVI

As can be seen from figure 5, GRV is a key uncertain parameter affecting the value of stocks. Range stock changes = 2.42 MM m3. 
Summarizing geological uncertainty, it is possible to say that the GRV uncertainty is the main geological risk, which affects the economic efficiency of the project.

	Maps of reserves 
Based on the known values of recovery factors (from oilfield-analogue), reserves were calculated general for the field C. The result of the probabilistic simulation was the set of 400 geological models (in program RMS, Roxar). This equal scenarios characterize the structure of Field C. Evaluation of the required number of realizations based on the comparison of the stability of the obtained distributions for reserves P10, P50 and P90 [7]. When the number of realizations was above 400, the variability of the predictions of the inventory for the selected percentiles does not exceed 1 % (standard deviation stabilization). Then, for each realization map of density of reserves was built [2, 8]. Then, the average value of reserves in all realizations can be calculated:

?Reserves?_average=?_(k=1)^n-??Reserves?_k/n?				(2)

n – number of realizations
This map characterizes the expected value of STOIIP at each point in the reservoir at the initial stage of exploration at the current set of uncertainties.
Then the map of confidence of reserves was built, which from a mathematical point of view represents the coefficient of variation of reserves calculated by the formula:

C_v  =?_OIP/?OIP?_average 			                               (3)
?_OIP- standard deviation
C_v- coefficient of variation of reserves
Confidence map allows to rank areas of the field according to the degree of confirmation of the expected reserves at the current level of available information on the reservoir structure. 

	Ways for choosing the optimal drilling strategy in presence of geologic uncertainties
As noted in the previous section, there are a number of geological uncertainties in the field C. Therefore the necessity of considering risks when planning of drilling requires a probabilistic assessment of key objectives of the drilling. The main uncertainty – GRV is not defined precisely and has uncertainty range. This range affects on the value of STOIIP and should be taken into account to estimate NPV. For this case the EMV (expected monetary value) is used instead of NPV and can be calculated by the next formula [9]:

?EMV?_i  = ?NPV?_i*p_i					(4)

Where p_i- the probability of occurrence of an event
Expected value estimation allows to account for major uncertainties of the project and to conclude on its profitability [17].
Next, the first drilling strategy will be considered.

	Base sequence of drilling
The basic strategy involves drilling initially from the areas with the largest reserves. To simplify calculations it was decided to merge the wells into the groups. Group of wells were chosen on the basis of map reserves, and map of confidence of the reserves. The created groups are presented in figure 6.

 
Figure 6 – Groups of wells on map of reserves (left) and confidence map (right)

As it can be seen from figure 6 groups G1 and G2 located by the already drilled exploration wells, so there is maximum confidence in the reserves (0.8 to 1). The group G3 is selected in the zone of moderate certainty (0.7-0.8), and groups G4-G7 are selected in the area of low confidence (0.1-0.7).
The order of drilling in the base case is chosen according to the maximum EMV of every group of wells. It should be noted that in groups G4-G7 one of two production wells was transferred into injection, in groups G1-G3 one or two wells were transferred into injection.
Cumulative parameters were calculated in the hydrodynamic simulator (t-navigator), for each of the groups and presented in Appendix 9. Flowrates for every group of wells are presented on the Appendix 10.
It should be noted that the parameters are presented for the variant when GRV is designed for option of OWC is equal to the Spill Point.
In the basic sequence of drilling, the probability of having the value of reserves in each group can be equal to the value of confidence in these reserves (based on the map of confidence).
Therefore, for every group firstly NPV should be calculated. After, EMV for every group can be determined:
?EMV?_i  = ?NPV?_i*c_i					(5)

c_i- value of confidence of reserves for every group
Then the total EMV was determined. The table 2 presents the results of calculations.



Table 2 – Results of EMV calculations
Group	G1	G3	G2	G4	G5	G6	G7	Total
NPV, mln RUR	325.04	274.76	237.49	126.2	76.2	48.573	27.927	1116
Confidence, %	90%	85%	90%	50%	40%	50%	30%	-
EMV, mln RUR	292.54	233.55	213.74	63.1	30.48	24.287	8.378	866.1

Based on the results of the calculations, it can be seen that the total EMV is equal to 866,1 million. 
Conclusion – groups G1, G2 and G3 have maximum oil rates, and accumulated parameters. In addition, these wells are located in the zone of maximum confidence, so they need to drill first from economic point of view, then to drill wells in descending order of EMV.
So the basic sequence of drilling is as follows:

 
Figure 7 – The base sequence of drilling

In this example variant of drilling for Spill point case was considered. However, the uncertainties are not taken into account in the basic strategy. The basic strategy involves the drilling field since the zones in which the expected maximum start oil rates, NPV and also the highest confidence in the reserves and eventually EMV. However, this strategy fails to take into account the value of information that can be obtained while drilling risky wells. In addition, GRV, and accordingly reserves have a wide range of uncertainties that must be reduced in the drilling of each subsequent well. In the following section the approach based on the VOI – value of information will be considered.

	Alternative drilling sequence based on VOI approach
As was shown in the previous section, the drilling by the base scenario may be ineffective in the absence or lack of information about the defining parameter. Ideally, additional information should be gathered until it is accompanied by an increase in the NPV of the project and reduces the investment risks of the company. 
In general, as several authors extensively report it, value of information calculation is performed using the following equation [11]:

VOI = ?EMV?_(with information)-?EMV?_(without information)			(6)

In this case, EMV without information is the total EMV calculated for the base variant (866,1 MM RUR).
A mandatory condition is that the index of the VOI should be greater than 0 for the selected sequence of drilling [14, 16]. 
As noted above, the primary geological uncertainty is the value of GRV. Therefore, the main purpose of the drilling of each subsequent well is to obtain information about the geological structure of the reservoir.
It should be noted that each of the drilled wells can uncover several formations, therefore it is necessary to have the total distribution of the GRV for all oilfield. It is obtained by summarizing GRV corresponding to each probability and is shown in figure 8.

 
Figure 8 – Total GRV distribution for all formations

Groups of wells remain unchanged and were presented in figure 6. 
It is necessary to estimate the minimum value of GRV at which the drilling of these groups is cost-effective. For this, 4 values of NPV for each group of wells for GRV corresponding to Spill point, LKO and 2 additional cases of OWC were calculated.  
The dependence of the NPV from GRV for each of the groups is presented in figure 9. 

 
Figure 9 – NPV from GRV relationship

As it can be seen from the figure 8 the dependence can be approximated by a straight line for every group of wells. It can be seen that for G1, G2 and G3 even in the case of minimum GRV (which corresponds to LKO) NPV is still positive, so these groups are not risky and should be drilled firstly. For groups G4-G7 the minimal GRV above which the project is positive exists. These minimal profitable values of GRV are presented in the table 3.



Table 3 – minimal profitable values of GRV
Group 	G1	G2	G3	G4	G5	G6	G7
min profitable GRV, MM m3	-	-	-	14.2	24.2	20.5	19.8

As it can be seen from table 3 the drilling of groups G4, G5, G6 and G7 have the risk of being economically unprofitable in certain realizations of GRV. Therefore it is necessary to choose a strategy of drilling, which gives the maximum value of information about the GRV value and at the same time it ensures maximum profit for a project. It should be noted that theoretically a certain amount of information about the GRV can be obtained after drilling any of the wells.
For 7 groups of wells there are 7! sequences of drilling. Since the groups G1, G2 and G3 are located at a high structural level, and near the drilled exploration wells, they doesn’t bring a lot of information about the volume of the reservoir, so they should be drilled in the first place from economic point of view. Therefore, the sequence of drilling of the first three groups is the same as in the basic strategy.
Remaining groups G4-G7 have the number strategies is equal to 4! = 24. To select the optimal strategy decision trees for each sequence should be built. In the absence of information about the structure of the deposits (seismic data, uninformative and the problem of a thin layer) the minimum profitable values GRV, presented above in table 6 were selected as the nodes in the trees.
The best would be the strategy that will have the maximum VOI, because it ensures the maximum EMV and consequently profit of the project. It should be noted that after drilling each of the wells the level of uncertainty decreases and the probability will be calculated using the formula 7 above.
Given that for the original 4 groups 24 strategies of drilling exists, it was decided to reduce the number of strategies by removing similar sequences. From table 6 it can be seen that G4 has minimal economic value GRV, and the G5 – the maximum. Therefore, it was decided to consider the sequence of drilling if the G4 is in the first place and G5 at the last and G5 in the first place, and G4 – the last. Also additional variants were considered, such as the drilling of the first of the G7, G6.
Initially 2 variants were considered:
	G-4 in the first place, then drilling the G-7, G-6 and at last the G5, which is located in the zone of minimum confidence the reserves;
	G-5 is being drilled in the first place, then drilling G-7, G-6 and at last G4.
The sequence G1,2,3-G4-G7-G6-G5 is shown on the figure 10, sequence G1,2,3-G5-G7-G6-G4 is shown on the Appendix 1.
 
Figure 10 - Sequence of drilling with starting from G4

It should be noted that on the basis of information obtained at each step, the distribution of GRV change. Probabilities can be calculated by the formula 7 above.
So, the EMV for the sequence presented in figure 10 can be calculated:

EMV = ((1116*0.99+842*0.01)*0.75+590*0.25)*0.85+365*0.15=889.7 MM RUR

For 2 considered variants EMV and VOI are presented in the table 4.

Table 4 – Values of EMV and VOI for beginning from G4 and G5
Drilling sequence	EMV, MM RUR	VOI, MM RUR
	base variant	for current sequence	
G1,2,3-G4-G7-G6-G5	866.1	889.7	23.6
G1,2,3-G5-G7-G6-G4	866.1	759.7	-106.4

With this strategy, the maximum value of VOI for sequence G1,2,3-G4-G7-G6-G5, presented on the figure 10 above. 
In addition drilling initially from G6, G7 was also considered: drilling G7 and G6 each other, and the drilling of G4 after G7 (sequences are presented in Appendix 4 and 5).
Also, the sequence of drilling in which the most risky group G5 is drilled after G4 was considered (Appendix 3). 
And finally a variant in which the drilling stops after G1,2,3 was considered – without drilling risky wells. The results of the calculations are presented in table 5.

Table 5 – Alternative values of EMV and VOI 
Drilling sequence	EMV, MM RUR	VOI, MM RUR
	base variant	for current sequence	
G1,2,3-G7-G4-G6-G5	866.1	839.7	-26.4
G1,2,3-G7-G6-G4-G5	866.1	840.0	-26.1
G1,2,3-G4-G6-G7-G5	866.1	869.4	3.3
G1,2,3-G4-G5-G7-G6	866.1	808.8	-57.3
G1,2,3	866.1	837.3	-28.8

As we can see from tables 4 and 5 the maximum value of the VOI for the strategy in which G4 is drilled in the first place, and G5 in the past.

Results 
The basic strategy of drilling in the presence of uncertainties involves the drilling from the zones with the highest expected EMV in the first place. EMV in this case is 866 MM RUR. The basic strategy does not take into account the value of the information obtained at each stage, therefore an alternative sequence of drilling based on the VOI was considered. The EMV for the drilling sequence G1-G2-G3-G4-G7-G6-G5 is 889.7 MM RUR. The VOI is estimated at 23.6 MM RUR. Therefore this strategy is optimal in the presence of geological uncertainties.

Conclusions 
	The probabilistic approach to the evaluation of geological reserves in the field C was considered
	Sensitivity analysis showed that the GRV has the greatest influence on the value of STOIIP
	Two strategies of drilling new wells on field C was considered – the base and on the basis of value of information
	Strategy, based on VOI is optimal due to the highest positive value of VOI
	Considered approach can be applied to other fields in the presence of a range of uncertainties.
 BREAKS HERE
Well completion with the conducting of multi stage hydraulic fracturing (MSHF) in horizontal wells is developing rapidly and is increasingly used. Successful use of this technology was on the fields developed by oil companies Tatneft, Rosneft and Gazprom Neft mainly in hard to recover reserves, where high sand to shale ratio and low coupling is a serious problem. On the fields developed by Oil Company Bashneft has carbonate reservoirs, the development of which is carried by vertical wells with acid fracturing and horizontal wells.
The main purpose of the project is maintenance of the increase in oil production and oil recovery factor due to the use of MSHF technology in carbonate deposits. Objectivation of the optimal fracture parameters and the number of stages during the multi stage hydraulic fracturing (MSHF).
Tasks that need to be addressed when planning the drilling of horizontal wells with multistage fracturing operations is the determination of the most appropriate orientation of the fracture relative to the wellbore, on the basis of distribution of stress in the reservoir. To determine the optimal geometry of the hydraulic fracture depending on the loading of proppant, on the basis of economic calculations to determine the required number of hydraulic fractures.
The main selection criteria of wells for drilling horizontal wells with conducting multi fracturing are: supply oil reserves, minimal risk of water breakthrough, the high sand to shale ratio.
Comparative calculations of different types of fracture using the sector simulation model. Theoretical calculations on an analytical model to select the optimal geometry of the fracture and the number of frac stages in horizontal wells (based on the model of the PKN fracture. Productivity is determined on the basis of the approach Valko-Economides), which are compared with the results of simulation model. Satisfactory convergence of the initial flow rates, the maximum NPV and the optimal number of fracture stages.

General information about the field

The field N is located in the Northern part of the Republic of Bashkortostan (figure 1). The field has been developed since 1969. Geological section of the field presents a typical breakdown North platform part of Bashkortostan. The field drilled to a depth of 2712 m and is represented by Quaternary, Neogene, Permian, Carboniferous and Devonian systems.

Geological characteristics

Commercially oil-bearing are the carbonate deposits of the middle Carboniferous (c2ks, C2vr, C2b), clastics deposits of the lower Carboniferous (C1rd-bb-tl), carbonate deposits of the tournaisian stage (C1t), Famennian (D3fm), clastics deposits of the Devonian (D2ml - ps+D3tm). In the tournaisian reservoir (C1t) contains 25% of residual recoverable oil reserves. The object is at the initial stage of the development. The development system is not formed. The object of development is characterized by a low oil recovery due to the fact that the object has a complex geological structure. In order to increase the rate of oil recovery is planned to consider the drilling of horizontal wells with multi-fracturing.


Analysis of field development

In the tournaisian reservoir contains 25% of recoverable oil reserves from all oil reserves of the field.
Indicators of development of oil prospect of the tournaisian layer are presented in figure 1.
 
Figure 1 - Historical performance prospect
Average flow rates of wells for oil and liquids decreased continuously during periods of drilling oil deposits, and the periods of stabilization of the existing wells stock. The decrease in well discharge liquid due to the drop in the current reservoir pressure in the zones of selection. In the period 2008-2012. there is an annual increase of the average production rates of oil, in connection with the implementation of an effective well stimulation. 
Average production rates for oil and liquid was, respectively 4.7 and 7.8 tonnes/day. The annual volume of water injection – 78.9 Mm3. Cumulative oil production for prospect 4-5 172.2 Mm3, for prospect 3 4.9 Mm3. Percent of recovery from the reservoir for prospect 4-5 equal to 1.1 % , for prospect 3 equal to 2.0% respectively.

Analysis of the initial performance of the wells

On the simulated area was made an analysis of the initial performance of the wells (figure 2). Wells are divided into four groups in accordance with the flow rates of oil.
 
Figure 2 - Initial oil flow rate
Wells is characterized by the following indicators: average oil flow rate of vertical wells – 4.0 tonnes/day, oil flow rate of vertical wells with acid hydraulic fracturing – 11.2 tonnes/day, oil flow rate of horizontal wells with multi stage hydraulic fracturing – 58.3 tonnes/day.
The effectiveness of horizontal wells higher the vertical well by increasing of the drainage area. Due to the high initial production rates on horizontal wells it is recommended that further development of the field using horizontal wells.
This project was the experience of drilling horizontal wells in the field. In total tournaisian reservoir was drilled 21 horizontal wells. Statistics drilled horizontal wells in the field and initial oil flow rate of horizontal wells presented in figure 3.
 

Figure 3 - Statistics drilled horizontal wells in the field and initial oil flow rate of horizontal wells
Initial oil flow rates of oil horizontal wells drilled in the period from 2014 to 2016 is three times higher than wells drilled in the 1990. Horizontal drilling with MSHF effective: specific cumulative oil production horizontal well with MSHF for the first 12 months of operation is 1.6 times higher than in wells without MSHF. 

Analysis of well stimulation.

In the period from 2007 to 2016 there were conducted 46 stimulations in production wells: acidizing, well re-completion to overlying formation, reperforation and acid fracturing.. Cumulative incremental oil production equal to 46.7 M tonnes. Maximum incremental oil production (14 Mm3) obtained after acid fracturing. Statistics the main types of workovers presented in figure 4.
 
Figure 4 - Main types of workovers
In 2015 the first well with the technology of multistage fracturing operations was drilled at the field. To conduct multistage fracturing operations on the well were dropped stepwise composite balls for the activation of the next clutch and closing the previous one. The first port is activated by pressure, the number of stages equals to 5.
The first multi-fracturing in field N was carried out according to the following scheme (figure 5):
	The opening of the first port, conducting acid fracturing in the volume of 50 m3 (15%  HCI);
	The opening of the second port, mini frack, conducting acid fracturing with proppant in the amount of 50 m3 (15% HCI and 8 tonnes proppant);
	The opening of the third port, conducting acid fracturing with proppant in the amount of 50 m3 (15% HCI and 10.5 tonnes proppant);
	The opening of the fourth port, conducting acid fracturing with proppant in the amount of 50 m3 (15% HCI and 10.5 tonnes proppant);
	The opening of the fifth port, conducting acid fracturing in the volume of 50 m3 (15% HCI).
 
Figure 5 - The schedule of MSHF

Based on the results of the first wells introduced 6 horizontal wells with multistage fracturing operations by object C1kzl. The results are presented in table 1.
Table 1 - The results of the input horizontal wells
Well	Date	Layer	Initial parameters	Cumulative oil production, M tonnes	Note
			Qoil,	Qliquid,	Water cut		
			tonnes/day	m3/day	%		
1ã	2015	C1kzl	88.0	102.2	6.0	7.5	2 acid frac and 3 PHF
2ã	2016	C1kzl	50.0	72.0	23.7	-	5 acid frac with proppant
3ã	2016	C1kzl	49.3	55.9	5.4	1.5	4 acid frac and 1 PHF
4ã	2015	C1kzl	62.4	74.6	8.7	6.7	2 acid frac and 3 PHF
5ã	2016	C1kzl	35.6	66.1	34.7	2.2	3 acid frac and 2 PHF
6ã	2016	C1kzl	74.2	90.0	10.0	1.6	5 acid frac with proppant
7ã	2016	C1kzl	51.4	102.6	48.4	1.5	5 acid frac with proppant

MSHF technology in horizontal wells can be characterized as effective in the tournaisian reservoir deposits and is recommended for further implementation.
Also, the parameters of fracturing at the fields-analogues (16 wells, 9 fields) of the company were analyzed. Multi-fracturing was carried out according to the following schemes: acid fracturing with proppant and acid fracturing with proppant in combination with standard acid fracturing, acid fracturing standard (figure 6).

 
Figure 6 - Schemes of the multi-fracturing
The distribution of wells (stages) on the concentration of HCl presented in figure 7. Large part of the acid frac conducted mainly with 15% HCl.
 
Figure 7 - Distribution of wells (stages) on the concentration of HCl

The average specific volume of acid per meter of the effective thickness according to the considered wells to 5.5 m3/m. Average specific gravity of proppant per meter of effective thickness according to the considered wells is 1.0 tonne/m.

Analysis of pressure condition

The energy state of the object is satisfactory. The current reservoir pressure of 134.9 atm at an initial formation pressure of 155 atm. In the period from 2010 – 2014 reduction in reservoir pressure associated with an increase of oil withdrawal (effective stimulation and insufficient compensation (injection ratio 30-50 %). 
In the period 2015-2016 in area translated into 6 injection wells. Current injection ratio is 165 % accumulated 69 %. Reservoir pressure is reduced relative to the initial 13%. 

Analytical calculation

In this section theoretical calculations on an analytical model for selecting the optimal fracture geometry and the number of stage of HF in horizontal wells will be considered.
The modern level of development of technologies enables multi-stage fracturing (8-10 stages) using a large mass of proppant. However, the analysis results for multi fracture, performed various service companies confirms, that an increase in frac stages and proppant mass, the lack of an integrated approach reduces technical and economic efficiency of fracturing operations. This is due mainly to lower productivity in each subsequent stage fracturing, as well as the high cost of materials (proppant) and expense of conducting each subsequent cycle of hydraulic fracturing. Thus, the obvious need to solve the following multi-parameter problem consisting of two components:
	Determination of optimum geometry of a hydraulic fracture for the calculated weight of the proppant, provided the maximum economic efficiency taking into account the technological and geological risks;
	Determination of the necessary number of stages of hydraulic fracturing with the maximum economic efficiency.
The project offers a comprehensive techno-economic approach to the calculation of the optimal geometry of the fracture and the number of frac stages on horizontal wells. The approach includes the calculation of the optimal geometry of the hydraulic fracture and the proppant mass, given the geological and economic constraints, the selection of the required number of coats that will provide the maximum NPV.
The basis of the criterion of optimal geometry of fracture accepted analytical PKN model proposed by Valko and Economides and the concept of equilibrium heights based on empirical data. After calculating the geometry of a single fracture assuming that all the fracture work with the same productivity. Estimated productivity of the entire system of the hydraulic fracture. Evaluated the production capabilities of the well and calculates the economic criteria for selecting the optimal number of stages in multistage fracturing operations.
	Determination of optimum geometry of a hydraulic fracture horizontal wells.
The optimal geometry of the fracture ensures minimum skin factor, corresponding to the maximum dimensionless productivity index (Jd), depending on the number of proppant (Np).
N_p=(2•k_f•V_p)/(k•V)                                                                                                                                              (1)
For N_p?0.1
J_fDmax (N_p )=1/(0.990-0.5•ln(N_(p,eq) ) )=1/(2.7-0.5•ln(N_p•C_A ) )                                                    (2)
For N_p?0.1
J_fDmax (N_p )=1/(-0.63-0.5•ln(N_p )+F_opt )                                                                                         (3)
Geometrical parameter F_opt is determined from the charts [11].
C_(fD,opt)=(100•y_eD-C_(fD,0.1))/100•(N_p-0.1)+C_(fD,0.1)                                                                             (4)
Where the parameter F_opt is defined as
F_opt=(A+B•u_opt+C•u_opt^2+D•u_opt^3)/(a^'+b^'•u_opt+c^'•u_opt^2 )
An u_optis defined as
u_opt=ln(C_(fD,opt) )
After the calculation of the maximum dimensionless productivity index, calculated with the parameters of fracture (length, width and height).
Width and length are determined by the formulas:
x_fopt=v((k_f•V_f)/(k•h•C_fD ))                                                                                                                                     (5)
w_opt=V_f/(x_f•h)                                                                                                                                                  (6)
After that is determined skin factor and productivity of fracture:
S_c=(k•h)/(k_f•w)•[ln??(h/(2•r_w ))-?/2? ]                                                                                                                    (7)
J_DTH1=1/((1/J_DV )+S_c )                                                                                                                                      (8)
The values of width and length obtained with the use of charts, do not always satisfy the geological and technical constraints. There are 4 restrictions that are taken into account in the proposed model of fracture:
	The minimum width of the fracture depends on the size of the grains of proppant, and should not be less than three average diameters, as at lower values it is difficult to fix the width;
	The maximum width of the fracture will depend on the mechanical properties of the reservoir rock and the maximum effective pressure that may create equipment;
	The maximum length of a fracture depends on the environment of the well and the maximum effective pressure that may create equipment;
	The maximum height of the fracture depends on the position of OWC.
In determining the optimum geometry of the fracture is impossible to choose the mass of the proppant as the length and dimensionless productivity index monotonically increase with increasing proppant mass (figure 8).









Figure 8 - Relationships between Xf and Jd from mass of proppant
Therefore, to determine the optimal design we need additional conditions, which it is advisable to use the criteria of economic efficiency.
	Determination of the necessary number of stages of fracture
The main parameter based on which select the optimal proppant mass, accepted the net NPV. To determine the NPV is calculated oil production at the well for a given mass of proppant used for each stage of hydraulic fracturing. The optimal number of frac stages is selected based on the maximum NPV. The results of the calculations are presented in figure 9















Figure 9 - Select of the optimal number of frac stages in horizontal well.
From figure 9 it is seen that after five stages the NPV decreases. This is due to the increase in the loading of proppant and the high cost of each subsequent stage of the hydraulic fracturing.
The parameters of the fracture are presented in table 2.
Table 2– Parameters of the fracture
Parameter	Value
Xf, m	58
Hf, m	13
w, mm	3.5
Mass of proppant  1 frac, tonnes	12

To assess the performance of the proposed approach the calculations compared to the analytical approach to selecting the optimal number of stages in multistage fracturing operations with simulation model.

Numerical calculation

The optimal length of horizontal wells was selected using simulation model (figure 10). Various options for the length of a horizontal well were calculated (from 100 m to 1000 m). In accordance with conducted analysis, the optimal length of horizontal part is 500 m. The length was chosen taking into account economical parameters such as NPV and obtained oil production (figure 11).
 
Figure 10 - Comparing of oil production
 
Figure 11 - Selection of optimal length of horizontal well

Select the type of transaction horizontal wells.

Tournaisian object is characterized by a high value of sand-to-shale ratio. The average sand-to-shale ratio equal to 6. In order to provide highest sweep efficiency various options were considered. Using simulation model of various transaction of horizontal well was considered. Based on the performed calculations we can conclude that drilling U – shaped profile, provide highest sweep efficiency.

Development options

After justification of the length of horizontal wells, horizontal well profile considered the following options: basic option with the existing wells. The option of drilling 11 horizontal wells without translation under the injection. The option of drilling 11 horizontal wells, and translation under the injection 10 injection wells.
The option with horizontal production and injection wells has the highest accumulated oil production. Cumulative oil production for prospect 4-5 is 763.7 M tonnes, for prospect 3 is 56.0 M tonnes. It is recommended option with horizontal production wells and injection wells.

Optimization of base development option
To increase the productivity of wells with strategy development planned for multistage fracturing operations in horizontal wells. For the beginning of the selected optimal number of stages. As we can see from the figure 12 the optimal number of bursting -5, which corresponds to the maximum NPV.
 
Figure 12 - Selection of optimal number of stages
Next was to determine the optimal geometry of the hydraulic fracture. Maximum oil production corresponds to the following parameters of fracture (figure 13): length 60 m, height of 13.1 m and a fracture width of 3.3 mm. The results of the analytical calculation and assessment of the effectiveness of drilling simulation model show a high convergence of the indicators with the same initial conditions.












Figure 13 - Selection of optimal fracture parameters.
For justification of the direction of fracture calculated variants with longitudinal and transverse hydraulic fracture. The calculations showed the advantages and disadvantages of types of fracture.
Longitudinal fracture.
Advantages:                                                 Disadvantages:
	areal sweep increases;                      1. low rate of production in the  initial period;
	cumulative production increases;    2. long life of development.
	Uniform injection front.
Transverse fracture.
Advantages:
	initial production rate is higher;
Disadvantages:
	areal sweep decreases;
	risk of water breakthrough through fractures;
	part of the prospect is not involved in the development.
The difference in the cumulative production of oil is insignificant. The highest oil production with transverse hydraulic fracture for the first time economic more profitable. Transverse fracture selected for further field development. 
After determining the parameters of fracture, type of fracture was calculated by the variant of the development with MSHF. In the option with MSHF it is recommended to drill horizontal wells closer to the top of formation due to risk of water breakthrough from lower water-saturated layers. Cumulative oil production for the option with MSHF increases by 52 Mtonnes (prospect 4-5) and 4 Mtonnes (prospect 3).
The highest cumulative oil production over 64 years is achieved by the implementation of the model with MSHF and is 1661.9 Mtonnes.

Results and Discussion

The main results of the project the following:
	The analysis of the development showed that the most efficiently develop tournaisian reservoir using horizontal wells.
	Statistics of conducting multi fracturing in other similar fields showed high efficiency technology.
	Using theoretical calculations on the analytical models was to determine the optimal geometry of the fracture (X_f=58 m; H_f=13 m;w=3.5 mm) and the number of frac stages in horizontal wells (after 5 stage the NPV decreases. This is due to the increase in the loading of proppant and the high cost of each subsequent stage of the hydraulic fracturing).
	Technologies and technical means of drilling complex U-profile with the conduct of multistage hydraulic fracturing of carbonate reservoirs allow us to form an extensive system of canals and hydraulic fracture, covering the volume of the reservoir.
	The optimum ratio of length of the horizontal sections in horizontal wells and the number of stages of multi-fracturing depend on the parameters fracturing of the reservoir and the volume of injection of proppant. Optimal distance between the frack- ports of hydraulic fracturing is 100 m.
	The results of multivariate three-dimensional modeling of sector development revealed the following:
	in the considered geological conditions increase in the length of horizontal wells does not lead to an equally proportional increase of the flow rate of the liquid;
	the optimal length (500 m) horizontal section of the well;
	the optimal (length of horizontal section 500 m) number of 5-stage multi hydraulic fracturing;
	priority transverse fracture selected for further field development;
	optimal geometry of the fracture (X_f=60 m; H_f=13.1 m;w=3.3 mm, specific Mprop - 1.1 tonnes/m, Specific volume of acid – 5.5 m3/m.)
	The option of using MSHF is characterized as effective (NPV=1.8 bn rubles, cumulative oil production 1661.9 Mtonnes. Payback period 3 years)
 BREAKS HERE


Non-availability of the Numerical Simulation Model or its poor matching with the Historical Data of the oil field make search for an analytical algorithm allowing to evaluate Oil Reserves Recovery Efficiency. Moreover, there is the question to be answered namely whether the current Water-flood performance which is happened to be after Water Breakthrough is normal (expected) or early in order to realize whether the previously predicted project oil reserves will be recovered or not.   

In order to solve the problem different methodologies taking into account both Oil Production History Data and Reservoir Geology was applied to the Well Cluster characterized with high Watercut values and relatively rapid Water Encroachment into the production wells.   

As a result of the methodologies application to the Region in question a set of specific Curves was constructed and analyzed. 

Comparison of the obtained results and consideration of methodologies advantages and disadvantages allowed to choose the best one which take into account Reservoir Hetrogeneity as an appropriate analytical algorithm allowing to predict Water-flood performance efficiency on the daily basis.

Despite the fact development of the algorithm was based on the data of one of the hugest Western Siberia oil fields, it seems to be appropriate for application to the other oil fields as well. 

Introduction

To begin with, it is known that Decline Phase is typical for development of many oil fields. It is supposed to be such a stage when quite all the wells have been already drilled and major oil reserves have been produced. These oil fields are commonly characterized with decreasing oil rates as a result of Water Cut increase. It should be mentioned that these oil rate losses cannot be mitigated by drilling of new wells. So, based on the data of one of the hugest Western Siberia oil fields it was investigated that about one third of the oil rate losses corresponded to the recently drilled Well Cluster A, where only 9 wells have been producing in the past one and half years, whereas 480 wells have been producing all the rest of the given Field E. In order to evaluate such oil rate losses an analytical algorithm allowing to assess Oil Reserves Recovery Efficiency is necessary. It is worth noting that such evaluation is easier in case of Numerical Simulation Model presence. However, provision of not all oil fields with such a model is typical nowadays. Moreover, sometimes it is thought to be impossible to rely on the model results due to its poor mismatch with the Field Historical Data. So, in case of Simulation Model absence or inapplicability the algorithm is assumed to be useful. It should be mentioned that there is the Numerical Simulation Model matched to the Historical Data of the given Field E, which results will be used then for comparison. 

Theory

To begin with it is assumed that quite all the methods allowing to assess Waterdrive efficiency are aimed at the generation of a relationship between fractional flow parameters (water-oil relative permeability and water and oil viscosities) and oil recovery, whether achieved analytically or by simulation running. 

Engineered Waterdrive corresponds to Secondary Recovery and seems to be widely applicable since water supply can be provided quite in all well clusters and is not considered to be expensive. It should be mentioned that Waterflooding is assumed to be efficient since it allows both maintain reservoir pressure and sweep oil from the formation to the production wells. 
In fact, Waterdrive is thought to be especially useful in case of significantly depleted oil fields characterized with noticeable reservoir pressure decrease.  

On the hole, the parameters having main impact on efficiency of oil sweep with injected water can be subdivided into two groups namely microscopic and macroscopic ones. Rock wettability, porosity and permeability, physical properties of both formation and displacing fluids relate to the first microscopic scale group. They are supposed to be considered in scale of rock pores and finally form the value of the end-point Mobility Ratio, M, which equation is represented below:
M=  (k_ro^')/µ_o /((k_rw^')/µ_w )	(1)                                                                                                                              

Mobility Ration being the maximum velocity of water flow over that of oil is the dominant parameter influencing Waterdrive efficiency on the microscopic scale. It is common knowledge, that M ? 1 corresponds to highly efficient Waterdrive, since in this case volume of movable oil is thought to be equivalent to the volume of injected water and water cannot travel faster than the injected water. 

Reservoir Heterogeneity and Gravity Forces relate to the second macroscopic scale group. Their impact on oil sweep efficiency will be discussed in detail below.

Rock Heterogeneity

Reservoir Heterogeneity affects oil recovery through its influence on both the Vertical and Areal Sweep Efficiencies according to the following equation [1]:

N_p/N= E_V•E_A•E_D	(2)

There are two types of reservoir heterogeneity having impact on the overall sweep efficiency. They are:

Gravity Force

Before explanation of Gravity Force influence on Waterdrive efficiency, introduction of some new concepts is thought to be necessary.
To begin with fractional flow of water in a reservoir is defined as:
f_w=  q_w/(q_w+q_o )	(3)
This function is synonymous with the term Watercut.
Using Darcy’s law for two phase flows, neglecting Capillary Pressure effects and dividing numerator and denominator by  k_rw/µ_w   gives:

f_w=1/(1+µ_w/µ_o   k_ro/k_rw )			(4)

which is the fractional flow equation for horizontal displacement. The detail of deriving Eq.6 can be seen in the reference (Dake, L.P. (Rev.ed.). (2001). The practice of reservoir engineering Developments in Petroleum Science (Revised edition)). 

Fractional flow is considered to be the most fundamental concept associated with waterdrive, since the shape of its curve is a useful indicator of waterflooding efficiency and it takes into account in situ oil and water viscosities resulting in appropriate description of waterflooding process in the reservoir. 

For waterdrive in an inclined reservoir, if the displacement is in the more gravity stable updip direction then the fractional flow of water is modified as [3]:
f_w=  (1-G)/(1+µ_w/µ_o   k_ro/k_rw )	(5)
wherein 
G – a positive gravity number

G=2.743•?10?^(-3)   (kk_ro A?? sin??)/(qµ_o )	         (6)

To sum it up, it is worth saying that the larger the value of G the more gravity stable is the advance of the water and the watercut development is suppressed.

Methods Used

It should be mentioned that a vast number of methodologies was considered and applied to the region in question and its individual wells and finally the best ones based on the adequacy of the obtained results will be represented.

So, the first group of the methodologies is based on Development History Data of a Field. In case of Logarithm of WOR and the method based on the Buckley-Leverett theory, Current Oil and Water Rates are used, whereas the Domestic Methodology – Cumulative Values of Oil, Water and Liquid. All the methods described above are supposed to be useful in the forecast of waterflooding efficiency, calculation of the Cumulative Oil Value and certainly evaluation of the Remaining Oil Reserves. 

The second group comprising that model based on a modification of Dietz’s theory, takes into account geology of the reservoir to be exact its heterogeneity and fluid properties and allows to build the theoretical curve of Water Cut. 

All the methods described above and brief description of their matters be described in the paper. 




Logarithm of Water-Oil Ratio (Log(WOR))

Log(WOR) is such a method which is used for determination of the Remaining Reserves value that can be useful for prediction of Waterflooding efficiency. 

It is known that there is the straight-line relation between Log(WOR) and Cumulative Oil values that is proved by the following equation:
 	
Log(WOR)=(b(1-S_wc )/N) N_p+log?((?µ_0)/µ_w )+bS_wc
	(7)
wherein
a and b –constants of the straight-line oil-to-water relative permeability curve.

The straight-line slope is defined as:

M=  (b(1-S_wc))/N			(8)

This straight line intersects vertical axis at the point defined as:

n=log?((aµ_o)/µ_w )+bS_wc-  1/(ln?(10))	(9)

The constants a and b are obtained by plotting k_rw/k_ro versus S_w and can be obtained by the following equation:
log?(k_rw/k_ro )=?log(???a)+bS_w ?    		(10)

The results of the method application to the whole considered Well Cluster A and its wells individually will be represented below in the section Discussion of Results.

The method based on the Buckley-Leverett theory

To begin with this methodology is supposed to be a simple production decline analysis method for the forecast of oil production and evaluation of oil recovery from the production history data. Its brief gist will be represented below in this section. However, the details can be seen in the References [4] and [5]. 

The Buckley-Leverett equation is the basis for analyzing waterflood as a two-phase immiscible displacement process with dominant viscous force and is defined as:
(?S_w)/(?t_DS )+(?f_w)/?_(x_D ) =0	(11)

In Eq. 13, t_DS is the fraction of cumulative gross production to the pore volume of the swept reservoir volume, x_D is dimensionless distance.
Relative Permeability Ratio can be expressed as follows:
k_ro/k_rw =Ae^(-BS_w )	(12)

Where A and B are constants. According to Eq. 12 they can be found from the plot relative permeability ratio vs water saturation.

Based on the Buckley-Leverett equation and the assumption of the semilog relative permeability ratio [5], the exact solution of the water-oil-ratio and the oil fractional flow can be solved as follows:

?(W+1)?^2/W = Bt_DS	(13)

f_0=1/2(1-v(1-4/(Bt_DS ))	(14)

Eq.16 can be equivalently transformed to a linear form.

f_0 (1-f_0)=1/(Bt_DS )	(15)

An exact solution can be developed to forecast waterflood production performance for field conditions. Eq. 15 can be rewritten as (see References for detail):
Y=(Q_(L_0 )/Q_L )Y_0	(16)
with 	
Y=f_0 (1-f_0 )=f_0 f_w 		   (17)

Where Q_L  is cumulative liquid production in bbls and the subscript ‘0’ represents a representative reference point on the historical trend. Eq. 16 applies to the entire water fraction range after water breakthrough. The Y factor defined in Eq.17 can be converted to back to oil cut and oil production rate by 

f_0=1/2(1-v((1-4Y))	    	 (18)
and
q_0=f_0 q_L 		        	 (19)

The procedure for the forecasting with the exact solution is as follows:

	Determine the future gross rate q_L and cumulative gross production Q_L based on the injection policy and operational scenario for a given waterflood reservoir.
	Plot Y=f_0 (1-f_0 ) versus the historical cumulative gross production on log-log scale.
	Select a representative reference point on the decline trend from the Y plot.
	Forecast the future Y factor based on the reference point and extrapolate with -1 slope versus future cumulative gross production (Eq.18).
	Convert the future Y factor to f_0 (Eq.20).
	Calculate the forecast cumulative oil production rate by integrating the oil rate numerically.

The results of application of this methodology to the considered Well Cluster A and its wells individually will be represented below in the section Discussion of Results. 

The Domestic Methodology

Firstly, it should be mentioned that this group of methods based on Oil Production History was developed by the domestic experts. Different authors were aimed at investigation of the methodology to forecast the following oil field drainage process using specific relations between Cumulative Oil, Water and Liquid. It is worth noting that each of the experts proposed his or her own relation for calculation of remaining reserves and consequently obtained results are not supposed to be similar. The specific equations of the considered methodologies can be found in the References [7]. All groups of the Domestic Methodology were considered and applied. However, the result of only one of them (Group 1) will be represented in the section RESULTS, since Group 2 and Group 3 gave unrealistically optimistic results in comparison with the Reference (Simulation Model) Recovery Factor Value and Group 4 and Group 5 - irrelevant values of remaining reserves due to the method limitations in application. Brief gist of the given method will be discussed below.

Since the values of the forecast Cumulative Oil, Water and Liquid are calculated quite similarly in case of all the considered groups of the method, derivation of the necessary equations will be shown in terms of Group 1 [6].

V_l/V_o =aV_w+b			(20)

Relation between V_l   and V_o  ?(V?_l=f(V_o)) can be expressed as:
V_w/V_o +1=aV_w+b		(21)

V_o=V_w/(?aV?_w+b-1)=(V_l-V_o)/(?aV?_l-aV_w+b-1)	(22)

V_l=(?bV?_o-aV_o^2)/(1-aV_o )		(23)

Taking the derivative of Eq. 25, the following equation will be obtained:

(dV_l)/dt=d/dt((?bV?_o-aV_o^2)/(1-aV_o ))=d/(dV_o )((?bV?_o-aV_o^2)/(1-aV_o ))(dV_o)/dt`	 (24)

(dV_l)/dt=(a^2 V_o^2-2aV_o+b )/((?1-aV_o)?^2 )  (dV_o)/dt		 (25)

Since (dV_o)/(dV_l )=f_o, then movable volume of oil in reservoir conditions can be defined, assigning the critical value of the oil cut f_o as follows: 
1=((?1-aV_o)?^2+b-1 )/((?1-aV_o)?^2 ) f_o		(26)

(?1-aV_o)?^2 (1-f_o)=bf_o-f_o		(27)

1-aV_o=v((bf_o-f_o)/(1-f_o ))		(28)

 Then movable volume of recovered oil at given critical value of the oil cut will be defined as: 

V_(oil recovered(f_(oil limit)) )=1/a(1-v((bf_o-f_o)/(1-f_o )))		 (29)

Then movable volume of recovered oil at given critical value of water cut f_w is defined as follows:

V_(oil recovered(f_(water limit)) )=1/a(1-v(((b-1)(1-f_w))/f_w ))	(30)

Where a and b are the coefficients of linear approximation, which can be found from the straight-line relation between V_w and V_l/V_o .
Since the authors of these methods developed their own relations allowing to obtain the value of remaining reserves, the specific equations are certainly different as well. So, the detailed information concerning used equations and their derivations can be seen in the References [7].

The second group of methodologies comprising the model based on a modification of Dietz’s theory, takes into account geology of the reservoir to be exact its heterogeneity and fluid properties and allow to build the theoretical curve of Watercut. 

It should be mentioned that at list Stiles, Modified Stiles, Dykstra-Parsons and Pratz’s et.al. Methods were considered as well. However, they were supposed to be inappropriate due to their numerous limitations in application [8].

The model based on a modification of Dietz’s theory

This model is one that has been developed to give a practical method for predicting the waterflood behavior of a stratified reservoir. It is assumed to be appropriate in case of both permeability and hydrocarbon pore volume variations.

In the particular cases considered, it is assumed that the permeability can be characterized by a log-normal distribution and the hydrocarbon pore volume by a normal distribution. It is such a graphical method which enables the practicing engineer to predict the behavior of a stratified system is presented [9]. 

The theory and the specific equations corresponding to the model will be represented in the section below, however the outcomes obtained as a result of the model application to the considered Well Cluster A and its individual wells will be in the section Discussion of Results. 

The method derivation is based on the following assumptions:
	Capillary forces are negligible; their effects are only manifest in the relative permeability curves.
	The fluids are immiscible, incompressible and homogeneous.
	The reservoir is horizontal and uniformly thick; it is initially liquid saturated i.e. connate water and oil.
	The reservoir is composed of discrete layers, each having its own permeability, porosity and connate water saturation, each layer is homogeneous, isotropic and uniform in thickness. The permeability can be represented by a log-normal distribution and the hydrocarbon pore volume by a normal distribution.
	Despite differences in absolute permeability, the same relative permeability curves, based on the hydrocarbon pore volume, apply to all layers.
	The displacement process can be represented by the movement of a sharp pseudo-interface; only oil flows on one side of the interface and only water flows on the other.
	The porous medium is quasi-linear, i.e., the cross-sectional area normal to the flow can be represented as a function of the distance travelIed by the front.
	 The gravitational effects are negligible relative to the viscous effects.
	The displacement efficiency and mobility ratio remain constant throughout the life of the project [9].

According to considered Field E and, in particular, its problematical Well Cluster A, it will be assumed that porosity is constant and a Mobility Ratio of 0.454 is given. The permeability data taken from the Cored Well X, drilled in Field E, will be tabulated in increasing order.  

Workflow

	Plot permeability data on log-probability paper; this is the P(K) curve.
2.    Calculate the variation V which is given by

V=(?(k?_(84.1%)-k_(50%)))?k_(84.1%) 		 (31)

3.    Calculate the standard deviation ?_k:

?_k=ln 1/(1-V)	(32)

Construct the First Moment Curve, F(k)

	Read the permeability value k at P(k) =50 per cent
	Calculate k_(50%) exp (?_k^2)
	Plot k_(50%) exp (?_k^2) at P(k) = 50 per cent.
	Draw line parallel. to P(k) curve through this point. This is the F(k) curve. Now, with the P(k) and F(k) curves, it is possible to predict the behavior of the system using Eqs. 33, 34 and 35 [9].
f_D=1/(1+1/M)(F(k)/(1-F(k) ))		(33)

(S_D ) ?=S_D+(1-f_D)/((df_D)/(dS_D ))		(34)
where
S_D=1- P(k)		(35)

and
(df_D)/(dS_D )=(Mkexp(0.5?_k^2))/(?[M-(M-1)F(k)]?^2 k_M )		(36)


It should be mentioned that here (S_D ) ? is a synonymous with Vertical Sweep Efficiency. So, in order to obtain the value of Recovery Efficiency, it is necessary to multiply this by the values of Areal Sweep and Displacement Efficiencies. In case of considered Well Cluster A, Displacement Efficiency value was taken from the Field E Project Document. According to the Areal Sweep Efficiency value, it was calculated from D. Wolcott Charts developed for five-spot production system [10].

Discussion of Results 

Firstly, it was decided to apply the methodologies based on Oil Production History to the Field E region in question, to be exact, Well Cluster A. Therefore, the obtained results that are associated with application of Log(WOR) method, the methods based on the Buckley-Leverett theory and the Domestic Methodology will be analyzed and represented first.  

The Well Cluster A

Logarithm of Water-Oil Ratio (Log(WOR))

The curve, built as a result of Log(WOR) methodology application is shown in App. Figure R.1 a). The other curve on this graph corresponds to the one that is constructed on the basis of Field E Numerical Simulation Model Data. They are valid to be compared, since the Simulation Model is proved to be matched to the Historical Data of the Field E. As it can be shown from the graph, the obtained curves are matched to each other in quite a proper way, that allow to choose Log(WOR) as the appropriate methodology for the forecast of Oil Reserves Sweep Efficiency taking into account Oil Production History. Table R.1 proves Log(WOR) method applicability as well, listing the value of the relative error caused by Recovery Factor Forecast value calculation.

N.B.

The data used to construct Log(WOR) Curve was taken from the months Oil, Water and Liquid Production Data of the Well Cluster A which was supposed to be produced in the past one and half years. According to the appropriately matched Simulation Model Data, STOIIP of the region in question is 1991205.383 m3. The Critical Value of Watercut is accepted to be 98% (WOR = 49) by the company developing the Field E. 





Table R.1 – Comparison of the Recovery Factor Relative Error Forecast depending on the applied Methodology to the Well Cluster A
Method	Recovery Factor Forecast Relative Error 
Log(WOR)	13.8%
The method based on 
the Buckley-Leverett theory	76.2%
The Domestic Methodology	22.0%


The method based on the Buckley-Leverett theory

The curve, built as a result of the method based on the Buckley-Leverett theory application is shown in App. Figure R.2 b). The other curve on this graph, as in case of Log (WOR), corresponds to the one that is constructed on the basis of Field E Numerical Simulation Model Data and is considered to be the reference (model) curve. As a result of comparison of two obtained curves, the method based on the Buckley-Leverett theory does not seem to be appropriate, since its resultant Recovery Factor Curve appears to be too optimistic, showing overestimated outcome. To sum it up, this particular theory fails in case of Oil Reserves Recovery Efficiency Forecast according to the Well Cluster A, that can be proved by the value of the Relative Error, appeared as a result of Recovery Factor calculation. This is represented in Table R.1.

N.B. 

The data used to construct the method based on the Buckley-Leverett theory Curve was taken from the months Oil, Water and Liquid Production Data of the Well Cluster A which was supposed to be produced in the past one and half years. The reference date July 2013 was selected, with Y = 0.0285; Q_L=65501 m3. Constant gross rate was assumed. So, based on the average months value of Liquid Rates, q_L  was chosen to be 5690 m3/day. The STOIIP and the Critical Watercut values are similar to those ones used in the previous method calculations.

The Domestic Methodology 

The typical curve constructed a result of the methodology application to the Well Cluster A is shown in App. Figure R.3 c). As it was previously mentioned, the result of only one group (Group 1) of the Domestic methodology will be shown in the section, since all the other gave invalid results. Despite the fact this one (Orange Curve) may be matched with the Simulation Model Forecast Curve (Blue Curve), its outcome is obviously overestimated that does not allow to use it for the forecast of Oil Reserves Recovery Efficiency. Such a fact is proved by the value of relative error represented in Table R.1.  

N.B.

The months Oil Production data used for calculation of the value of Remaining Oil Reserves in accordance to the methodology were unloaded from the Software Package RN-KIN. The linear approximation coefficients a and b are 0.000001 and 1.1934 correspondingly.

Then, it was decided to apply the methodologies based on Oil Production History to the Individual Wells of Well Cluster A. The workflow is still be the same to those one described above. So, the results will be represented below in this section.

The Individual Wells of the Well Cluster A

Logarithm of Water-Oil Ratio (Log(WOR))

The Log(WOR) methodology application to the Individual Wells of Well Cluster A is shown in App. Figure R.2. In fact, the method of Log(WOR) (Blue Curve in Figure R.4) shows appropriate matching with the Reference (Model) Curve (Orange Curve in Figure R.4) even in case of individual consideration of the Well Cluster A wells. This fact is proved in Table R.2 as well.

Table R.2 - Comparison of the Recovery Factor Relative Error Forecast depending on the applied Methodology to the Individual Wells of the Well Cluster A
Method	Recovery Factor Forecast Relative Error, %
	The Wells of the Well Cluster A
	2	11	9	1	6	7
Log(WOR)	1.0	1.1	2.5	7.9	1.3	-
The method based on 
the Buckley-Leverett theory	72.5	36.9	51.7	51.3	14.2	0.2
The Domestic Method	4.8	11.8	11.8	21.2	31.2	-

The method based on the Buckley-Leverett theory

The method based on the Buckley-Leverett theory was applied to the Individual Wells of the Well Cluster A as well. As in the case of the whole Well Cluster A, the obtained results are thought to be overestimated that is proved by App. Figure R.3 and Table R.2. According to Figure R.3, Blue Curve corresponds to the method based on the Buckley-Leverett theory, whereas Orange One – to the Reference (Model) Curve. Only Well 7 shows appropriate matching that can be explained by its overestimated STOIIP value.


The Domestic Methodology

As it can be concluded from App. Figure R.4, application of the methodology (Group 1) to the Individual Wells of the Well Cluster A does not show appropriate matching with the Simulation Model Recovery Factor Forecast. Despite the fact the values of the Relative Errors represented in Table R. 2 do not seem to be so crucial as in the case of the method based on the Buckley-Leverett theory, it cannot be recommended as an efficient analytical algorithm for evaluation of Oil Reserves Recovery Efficiency. Hence, Orange Curve corresponds to the Simulation Model Recovery Factor Forecast, whereas Blue one - to the Domestic Methodology Forecast. 

The model based on a modification of Dietz’s theory

Obtained Theoretical Watercut Curve, as it shown in App. Figure R.5.a seems to match with the pattern of Waterflooding both across the whole Field E and its Well Cluster A and therefore proves to be efficient analytical algorithm for Oil Reserves Recovery Forecast. It should be mentioned that sharp Watercut decrease proved with the curve behavior, built in accordance with the Production Data of the whole Field E, can be explained by initiation of Hydraulic Fracturing in early 1990s. However, on the hole, the curves repeat each other behavior. In case of Well Cluster in question, the obtained Theoretical Watercut Curve has to be matched to the Initial Historical Data as it is shown in App. Figure, R.5.b, since the model is developed for Net-Pay Zone, whereas the considered region is proved to be in the Tranzition Zone.
In addition, there was one more Investors’s question to answer namely whether the oil reserves will be recovered after Water Breakthrough into the production wells. So, taking into account the graph, shown in App. Figure R.6, it can be assumed that the Red Region is responsible for the situation when previously predicted oil reserves are not recovered. In contrast, Green Region corresponds to their recovery and consequently can be considered as a guaranty of the following economical profitability of their production. It should be noted, that in case of initial well drilling in the Tranzition Zone, its theoretical Watercut Curve Profile is likely to be in the unfavorable Red Region. In these circumstances, the true Forecast can be guaranteed by The Parallel Curve behavior to the reference one. 

According to the Forecast Theoretical Watercut Curve constructed on the basis of the model, based on a modification of Dietz’s theory, it can be concluded that the Predicted Oil Reserves seem to be recovered. 

N.B.

According to the application of the discussed above methodology, Variation V equals to 0.702; the standard deviation ?_k is 0.854; k at P(k) = 50 per cent equals to 19.195 mD and k_50 exp?(?_k^2) is 83.456.

Conclusions

To sum it up, it is worth saying that the complex approach has been applied to evaluate Oil Reserves Recovery Efficiency. 

As a result of the considered methodologies application the following can be concluded:
	The method of Log of Water-Oil Ratio (Log(WOR)) was chosen as the best one among the methods based on Oil Production History Data.
	The model based on a modification of Dietz’s theory was chosen as the best one, taking into account Reservoir Heterogeneity.
	Comparison of these Methods Results and their Advantages and Disadvantages was performed.
	Finally, the model based on a modification of Dietz’s theory was supposed to be an appropriate analytical algorithm for evaluation of Oil Recovery Efficiency taking into account Reservoir Geology and allowing to forecast true Watercut behavior on the daily basis. In addition, its usefulness is proved by the opportunity to determine Waterflooding pattern instantaneously, whereas the Method of Log(WOR) requires long-term production essential for the determination of the actual Waterflooding behavior.  

Nomenclature

k_r^'
µ
Np/N

E_V


E_A

E_D
q_w
q_o
K
??
?
S_wc
N
N_p
V
f_D


P(k)

F(k)

S_D


(S_D ) ?

k_M

A/q
	= end-point relative permeability (mD).
= viscosity (cP).
=fractional recovery of the Stock Tank Oil Initially in Place (STOIIP)
= Vertical Sweep Efficiency – the fraction of the oil recovered in the reservoir cross-section by waterdrive.
= Areal Sweep Efficiency – the fraction of the oil recovered areally by waterdrive.
= Displacement Efficiency.
= produced water from a well.
= produced oil from a well.
= rock permeability (mD).
= gravity difference.
= advancement angle.
= connate water saturation.
= STOIIP, m3.
= cumulative oil, m3.
=Cumulative Production.
= fractional flow of displacing phase, dimensionless.

= distribution function of permeability data, dimensionless.
= first moment of P(k), dimensionless.

= integrated reduced saturation in any plane perpendicular to direction of flow, dimensionless.
= average reduced saturation behind the displacing front (vertical sweep), dimensionless
= mean permeability.

= the average Darcy velocity of the flood (ft/day).



Subscripts

BT
D
L
O
S
W
l
0

	=breakthrough.
=dimensionless, displacements.
=liquid.
=oil phase.
=swept.
=water phase.
=liquid.
=refernce point
Acknowledgements

The author wishes to thank the head of Reservoir Development Department at Open Joint-Stock Company “TomskNIPIneft” Pavel Molodykh who allowed to provide the validation survey for this research project. Special thanks to Rinat Kurbanov for his useful advice. 
 BREAKS HERE

Improper planning of the decline rate in production for new drilled wells leads to significant problems in the economic planning for the oil company. However, often the forecasting of the decline rate is based on statistics for all fields of the company in general, which leads to large errors. This is typical for well imposed after hydraulic fracturing on fields with low permeability. The rate of decline for such wells will be greater, and low permeability entails a prolonged duration of the transient flow, which also causes problems in calculating the rate of decline in production rate.
The aim of the project is to predict liquid decline rate for new drilled wells after hydraulic fracturing during first 12 months of production (transient conditions) on the basis of input data for reference block and adjacent wells.
The calculation of the decline rate of oil and liquid flow rate has been performed by simulation for two clusters K6 and K74A of field A. Based on the data from adjacent drilled wells, the geological model was constructed, which was taken as a basis for constructing the hydrodynamic model. The hydrodynamic model is constructed on the basis of PVT-properties of reservoir fluids and relative permeability curves and it then adapted with taking into account the expected initial flow rates and the primary values of water cut
Also, the applicability of other methods was used to predict the rate of decline in production, such as mathematical, statistical methods and a method based on the inflow equation for the transient regime, is investigated. The methods are compared with the actual decline rate. The comparison of methods was carried out with taking into account the cumulative oil production. The economic evaluation of applying for each method at production conditions was carried out.

Introduction
The vast majority of low-permeable reservoirs in Western Siberia are developed by directional wells after hydraulic fracturing. When planning production at such fields, it is important to consider all possible factors that may affect the rate of its decline, such as reservoir permeability, fracture properties, and development system. An incorrect or superficial approach to calculating the rate of decline leads to incorrect forecasting of cumulative production and, as a result, to incorrect financial planning, especially in the first year of operation for new drilled wells.
The decline curve analysis is used to find the dependence which fits the current decline in production rate with time and use this function to predict future performance. It means that observed trend in declining of production prolongs in the future and any factors which govern current production will last in the future. But it should be mentioned that this principle is valid only for late time production and pseudo-steady-state and boundary-dominated conditions when well drains uniform drainage area. At transient flow period the drainage area is increasing which leads to wrong prediction of future production. [1]
The analysis of possible methods for predicting the rate of decrease in liquid production will allow us to correctly draw up a production plan for such fields, taking into account the transient flow regimes that can last several months on low-permeability reservoirs. 

Decline factors in production rate of wells after hydraulic fracturing 
Oil rate in single phase systems is defined by Dupuis equation:
 				       						         (1)
In single phase systems the values of permeability (k), net thickness, relative permeability, skin-factor and external drainage radius are constant. Therefore the decline rate is mainly controlled by drawdown in reservoir pressure. If reservoir depletion is only influence factor, when the system is controlled by fluid expansion and reservoir pressure is above bubble point, the exponential decline is observed. According to material balance, in this particular case the cumulative oil withdraw is proportional to decline in reservoir pressure at constant compressibility. Oil viscosity and oil formation volume factor change at depletion and thus also influence on decline rate. [2]
Parameters which influence on decline in production rate may be classified as follows: 
1.	Operational conditions (skin-factor, bottomhole pressure fluctuations);
2.	Fluid parameters (Bo, ?o, ?w);
3.	Changes in relative permeabilities during production;
4.	Drainage area, which may change at transient conditions;
5.	Interphase effects;
6.	Pressure depletion;
7.	Effects due to front movement during flooding;
8.	Different transient effects. [2]
These parameters may be classified as controllable (due to workover, fluid injection, production problems and operated limitations) and uncontrollable (properties of the reservoir, producing fluid and primary drive mechanism). [3]
Decline analysis in water drive systems is more complex. After start of waterflood the reservoir pressure increases at a high rate, thus initiating increase in oil rate. Thereafter the oil rate is dependent on injection ratessweep efficiency, geological heterogeneity and well pattern configuration. Due to these factors the application of decline curve analysis may be complicated and lead to wrong results during early production period (until water cut exceeds 50%). The necessary condition to apply decline curve analysis is stabilization of sweep efficiency or changing with very low speed. The breakthrough of injected fluid is a function of mobility ratio and permeability heterogeneity. [2]

Methods of decline rate prediction 

Mathematical method 
Declining curves may be divided into four main types according to mathematical functions by which they are described:
I. Coordinate :	
								    	  				         (2)

II. Exponential: 									  		         (3)


III. Hyperbolic:	  										         (4)

IV. Harmonic (particular form of hyperbolic equation at b = 1) [4, 5]
where a, b, m, n – coefficients in equations, q0 – initial oil rate.
The most common method of decline curve analysis which is used by engineers nowadays is exponential decline was mentioned in the literature by Arnold and Anderson in 1908. In 1924 Cutler suggested to extrapolate hyperbolic decline by linearization of data on log-log paper. [3]
First researches in the field of decline analysis were  carried out by Arps in 1944. He deduced equations which describe decline in production rate on the basis of statistical analysis of production for non-fractured formations at constant bottomhole pressure and productivity index. [2]
Since 1945, researchers have attempted to relate the reduction index b to the physical characteristics of the reservoir and the mechanism of reservoir drive. It was established that the constant b in the equation differs for different types of active drive mechanisms. Thus, in case of hyperbolic equation for homogeneous reservoirs with the mechanism of gravity drainage the coefficient b is equal to 0.5. When two or more geological layers are developed simultaneously the value of b can exceed 1.0 and achieve 0.5 after exausting of more permeable layer. It is assumed that it is possible to determine coefficients in decline without any production history if effects of the reservoir and fluids properties on these constants are known [3]. 
Deduced by Arps empirical rate-time equation for the case of constant production was developed by other investigators, such as Gentry (1972), Fetkovich (1980 and 1996), Valvo and Lee (2010), etc. These researches  established that type of decline curve is affected by production history, reservoir properties and drive mechanism. [4] Moreover, it is established that decline curvature may change with time. [1]
Analysis of influence of reservoir type and mechanism of reservoir drive was resulted in development of exponential decline equation for gravity drainaged reseroirs (Lefkovits, 1958), complex equation for transient and pseudo-steady-state conditions (Fetcovich, 1972), decline equation for double-porosity reservoirs (Da Prat et al., 1981) and led the development of  theoretical basis to the solution of diffusivity equation combining boundary dominated and transient conditions (Doublet et al., 1994). [5]
Methods of decline rate prediction with use of mathematical equations which is used in this project included  taking of production history for reference block with similar reservoir and fluid properties and obtaining of values of constants in equation (2-4). After these coefficients are determined they are used for aim cluster to forecast future production.
Based on assumptions of Arps for decline curve analysis, several assumptions was taken for this procedure:
1.	The procedure of extrapolation is strongly empirical, because physical basis can be used only for several simple cases.
2.	The factors which currently influence on the form of decline curve for reference cluster will continue to govern it for the aim cluster in the future in the same manner.
3.	Coefficient b in decline curve equations may take any value from 0 to 1. [3]

Statistical method 
Statistical method is based on use of production history from reference block. As reference block the adjacent cluster, field sector or the whole field may be used when predicting the production from new-drilled wells. It is required that geological parameters and PVT-properties of produced fluid for reference block should be close to aimed block. It allows using both adjacent blocks and located far apart from each other.
After the first month of production the decline rate is calculated as ratio of current flow rate to initial one. In this project from the second month of production the decline in production rate is calculated for reference cluster with use of equation 5:

         (5)


dQ(ti), STB/day - Decline rate in current month (ti);
dQ(ti-1), STB/day - Decline rate in previous month (ti-1);

                                  - Cumulative liquid rate in current month (all wells); 

                                  
                                    - Cumulative liquid rate in previous month (all wells).

This equation was used in adopted form to be sensible to 	possible well downtime and changes in operating conditions of wells.

Method based on IPR equation
In common, inflow performance relationship (IPR) is applied at stabilized conditions. Usually, wells after hydraulic fracturing in low permeable formations  may take several months to reach stabilization. It is established by Zhou et al. (2014) that transient IPR is not only a function of productivity index but also it is dependent on time-step size. [4]
Flow regimes observed in the well after hydraulic fracturing are depicted in the fig. 2.3.1-2.3.2. Transient flow regimes were described by Cinco-Ley and Samaniego (1981) and boundary dominated flow regime is described by Wattenbarger et al. (1998).
These flow regimes are described as follows:
1.	Fracture linear flow: half-slope line on log-log plot of liquid rate versus time.
2.	Bilinear flow: fracture linear flow when fracture has a modern conductivity followed by formation linear flow. It is characterized by one-fourth-slope line on log-log plot of flow rate versus time and linearity on reciprocal rate versus quarter root of time. It is not be observed when dimensionless fracture conductivity exceeds 80.
3.	Formation linear flow: linear flow in the direction of wings of hydraulic fracture near the fracture. It is characterized by half-slope on log-log plot of flow rate versus time and linearity of reciprocal rate versus cumulative production. Deviation from half-slope may be observed when fracture is low permeable.
4.	Boundary dominated flow: exponential decline on log-log plot at small drawdowns. [5, 6]
Dimensionless parameters and solutions for different flow regimes which are used for calculation of flow rate at constant bottomhole pressure are presented at table 1. There is also the parameter of applicability is presented which indicates the limits for certain flow regime.




Table 1. Dimensionless parameters and solutions at constant wellbore pressure for flow rate for different flow regimes in hydraulically fractured wells [4, 7]
Flow regime	Bilinear	Linear formation	Pseudoradial
Dimensionless pressure	


Dimensionless time	


Dimensionless oil rate	


Oil rate, STB/day	


Applicability	




Where 
                                     (6-8)

Numerical method 
The production of reservoir fluid was simulated with use of PETREL by construction of reservoir sector model on the basis of available information from adjacent to aim cluster and prospecting wells at target region. The following data were used to construct geological model: pore volume, porosity, reservoir pressure and temperature, water saturation, relative permeability curves and fluid properties, such as formation volume factor, fluid viscosities and solution gas content.
The following assumptions were made during model construction: 
1.	The reservoir has constant thickness with constant relative permeability function.
2.	The radial flow Darcy's equation reasonably describes the fluid flow from the reservoir to the wellbore.
3.	The depletion drive mechanism adequatly describes the fluid flow into formation during regarded period of simulation (12 months from the start of production) for low-permeable formations.
4.	Any gravity drainage or capillary pressure effects are negligible.
5.	Different geological layers are separated by impermeable layers so there are no communication between them except immediately at the wellbore. [3]
The most challenging issue which should be used during simulation of production from wells after hydraulic fracturing is the method of fracture initialization. Three approaches are most widely used: the modeling of the fracture in an explicit form by grid refinement near the fracture, as well as the calculation and use of modified "well-cell" connection factors or negative skin factor.
The modeling the effects of fractures with the help of the skin factor does not allow to take into account the geometric characteristics of the hydraulic fractures, while the simulation of cracks in an explicit form can significantly increase the calculation time, and also has limitations associated with the orientation of the cells of the hydrodynamic grid.
The method of modeling the effects of hydraulic fracturing by creating additional connections can overcome these disadvantages and obtain reliable results with minimal time and computational resources.
In this project the method based on EasyFrac module of the Petrel software platform (Schlumberger) for geological and hydrodynamic simulation is used. The geometry of the hydraulic fractures, and namely parameters such as its orientation, half-length, height of propagation and width of fractures were specified in Petrel. Based on this data, there are grid cells exposed by the plane of the fracture, in which additional connections are created. The calculation is based on the modification of M. Economide's formula and uses as input parameters also the values of the wellbore drainage radius and the effective permeability of the proppant.
With use of this module recalculation is made from a dimensionless productivity index for a well with fracturing to the coefficients of connection for individual cells. Empirical relationships take into account the change in the Peaceman's radius from the cell size, anisotropy of the permeability, and the effect of "choke restriction” (limiting the flow capacity of "fracture in the cell" when the inflow of fluids from the fracture wings is greater than the flow along the fracture).
One of the key advantages of the method of additional connections is the possibility of changing the parameters of fractures without need to modify the grid geometry. [8]
Constructed hydrodynamic model was adapted using the data from service company about initial liquid rates which are expected to reach from individual wells according to production data from adjacent wells and based on geological model distribution of reservoir properties. This was achieved by matching of less reliable properties (“soft data”) such as relative permeability curves, position of OWC and values of formation permeabilities which were obtained from pore-permeability correlation on the basis of laboratory data.

Construction of geological model
 Before proceeding with predicting the rate of decline using hydrodynamic modeling, the geological model must be constructed.	In this project, it is proposed to carry out a forecast of the rate of decline in production at two certain clusters of the field which are supposed to have not been drilled yet (fig.1). These clusters are located near the transition zone. 
  
Fig. 1 Areal regions used for construction of sector geological model for cluster K6 (left) and K74A (right) (• - project wells)
The feature of these sectors of the field is absence of prospective wells. Therefore the geological model was constructed on the basis of data from adjacent wells which are depicted on the fig. 1 with help of sectors. Project non-drilled wells are represented by red points.
Geological model was built using Petrel software of Schlumberger. Well log data, well directional survey information and contours of geological layers were used as input data for construction of geological model. In case of cluster K6 the development object is layer U1 (3) while cluster K74A is intended to develop the object U1 (2-3). The objects under development are characterized by a low permeability near 1 mD. The porosity was distributed stochastically. On the basis of the equation of permeability versus porosity which was obtained for a given field and development object, permeability was calculated. Resulted KH-maps for both sectors are presented in fig. 2.
  
Fig. 2 KH-maps for cluster K6 layer U1 (3) (left) and for cluster K74A layer U1 (2-3) (right) obtained from constructed geological model
The permeability for both objects rarely exceeds1.0 mD. Average effective thickness is about 10 m. Constructed geological model was used as basis for further construction of hydrodynamic model to forecast numerically the decline in flow rate which is specific for investigated oil field.

Decline rate prediction by simulation
Hydrodynamic model was constructed on the basis of obtained geological model. PVT-properties of reservoir fluids, relative permeability curves which are specific for investigated field, were taken as input data. The hydraulic fracture has been initialized in model in an explicit form. Geometrical parameters of fractures were taken from reports of contractor for adjacent wells with similar geological features and averaged. The heigt of the fracture was specified for each well individually according to effective reservoir thickness in the region of this well. The used fracture’s parameters are shown in table 2.

Table 2. Parameters of hydraulic fractures
Fracture parameters	CLUSTER K6	CLUSTER K74A
wf, in	0.177	0.177
kf, mD	600 000	350 000
Xf, ft	395	330
FCD	3.0	3.5
To use the obtained hydrodynamic model for further calculations of decline rate the model was adapted to expected initial liquid and oil flow rates. The prediction of the initial production rates is based on the tests of adjacent wells and the expected heterogeneity of the field in accordance with the geological model of the whole field. The procedure of model’s adaptation consisted in matching of calculated from model initial oil rates and levels of water cut with expected ones. With this purpose the relative permeability curves and level of OWC were corrected as the most uncertain parameters and values of permeability were recalculated until adequate coincidence of expected initial rates with calculated ones is achieved.
The simulation has been performed during 12 months from the start of production of the last drilled well from the cluster. The production from each well has been led to a single date. Thus the liquid and oil flow rates were calculated with use of simulation and the rates of decline were calculated by equation 5 during within 12 months. The results of calculation are presented in figure 4 for cluster K6 and in fig. 5 for cluster K74A.

Decline rate prediction by statistical method
A necessary condition for the applicability of the statistical method is the 	availability of the analogous field or the block of the field which is already covered by oil production. This analogous oil field should have similar geological properties. As reference block for cluster K6 the cluster K7 was selected (fig. 3 right). This choice is evident since the cluster k7 is in close proximity to K6 and geological properties are similar for both clusters (table 3). More ambiguous situation was with cluster K74A since there are not  around clusters with similar properties. The most suitable choice is a cluster K101 (fig. 3 right) which is in transition zone like K74A and it is characterized by close geological properties (table 3) but it is located far apart from aim cluster (distance around 3 km).
  
Fig. 3 Selection of reference clusters for cluster K74A (left) and cluster K6 (right)

Table 3. Average geological properties for aim clusters and reference clusters
	K101	K74a
Production data	Available	Not available
k, mD	1.4	1.3
?, fractions	0.169	0.169
Net thickness, m	13.9	12.7
Sw, fractions	0.52	0.57
	K7	K6
Production data	Available	Not available
k, mD	1.0	1.1
?, fractions	0.168	0.168
Net thickness, m	20.3	18.5
Sw, fractions	0.49	0.52
Rates of production decline were calculated for reference clusters with use of equation 5 and then obtained decline rates were used for aim blocks. Results of calculations are shown in fig. 4-5 for clusters K6 and K74A with use of reference clusters K7 and K101 subsequently.

Decline rate prediction by mathematical methods
The oldest known method of decline curve analysis is mathematical method which consists in analysis of production history of individual well and extrapolation of decline curve by one of the mathematical functions. When parameters in equations are known they may be used for prediction of production decreasing. There was an attempt to find out the coefficients in equations for reference blocks (which were taken from the previous chapter) and apply them to aim clusters (fig. 4-5). The hyperbolic and exponential equations were taken as most commonly used according to literary sources.

Results and discussion
Comparison of observed methods which are used for prediction of decrease in liquid and oil production is presented in fig. 4-5.
   
Fig. 4 Decline prediction of liquid flow rate (a) and oil flow rate (b) for cluster K6 by different methods
  
Fig. 5 Decline prediction of liquid flow rate (a) and oil flow rate (b) for cluster K74A by different methods

For cluster K6 all methods of decline rate prediction lead to similar results and may be characterized as fairly acceptable. For cluster K74A statistical and mathematical methods lead to absolutely wrong prediction of decline rate because both methods are based upon production block which is selected not correctly.
To quantify the acceptability of different methods for decline rate prediction, the graph of the dependence of the accumulated production from time was constructed (fig. 6-7).
 
Fig. 6 Cumulative oil production from wells of cluster K6 calculated on the basis of observed decline prediction methods in comparison with actual data
 
Fig. 7 Cumulative oil production from wells of cluster K74A calculated on the basis of observed decline prediction methods in comparison with actual data
As seen from the fig. 7 for cluster K74A, not correct selection of decline prediction method can lead to overestimated or underestimated assessment of the accumulated production at least 2 times.
The method based on the IPR equation includes many parameters that are defined with unreliable accuracy. Therefore there are deviations from actual data. The results of calculation of relative error in determination of cumulative oil production are presented in table 4.

Table 4 Relative error (%) in determination of of cumulative oil production
	Relative error, %
	Cluster K74A	Cluster K6
Mathematical method (hyperbolic)	47.1	2.1
Statistical method	54.3	0.8
IPR equation	2.2	8.1
Simulation method	9.0	2.8
Relative error of cumulative oil calculation with use of methods which are based upon numerical calculation and IPR equation does not exceed 10%.

Conclusions
In this project, the possibility of applying of various methods for predicting the rate of decline in oil and liquid flow rate on low-permeable reservoirs with hydraulic fractures is investigated. As a result of this project, it was found that the choice of the method of predicting the rate of decline is based on available data. It is possible to use the mathematical method in the early stages of production with use of the reference block. 
However, in the case of a reference block, the statistical method is more appropriate, since it does not take into account the fall in production rate due to the downtime of the wells and their transfer into injection. The reference block should be chosen carefully in case of using the statistical method, since the difference in geological properties, the development system and many other factors can lead to a different decline rate. The statistical method is a fairly simple method that allows the calculation to be carried out in the shortest possible time, but a necessary condition for its application is the presence of a reference block. 
The method of calculating the production decline rate using the IPR equation requires the use of a significant amount of input data for the calculation, which is not always available while drilling stage. The IPR method relies on specific measured parameters. When tested at this field, it showed good convergence with the actual data. But a deviation in the initial period was observed which may be due to insufficient accuracy of input data, such as reservoir pressure and fracture’s parameters.
The method based on hydrodynamic modeling is the most time-consuming. Without the stage of adaptation or the absence of dynamic inflow data, its use is futile. But its use allows one to take into account the fracture’s geometry and various transient effects that last for a long time in low-permeability reservoirs. In addition, this method is applicable in calculating the production decline rate in systems where the maintenance of reservoir pressure is realized. Along with the method of prediction by IPR equation the simulation method has led to good convergence with the actual production data.
It is recommended to perform complex assessment of production decline rate on directional wells after hydraulic fracturing for low-permeable formations. For these specific conditions numerical method and method based on IPR equation are more preferable to use because only these two methods have resulted in good convergence of predicted decline rate with actual data for both clusters


Nomenclature
q(t)-flow rate, STB/day;
t-producing time, hours; 
qD-dimensionless flow rate;
PD-dimensionless pressure;
tDxf-dimensionless time based on the fracture half length;
xf-fracture half length, ft; 
k-permeability, mD; 
kro-relative oil permeability, mD; 
?-porosity, fractions; 
h-effective thickness, ft; 
?-fluid viscosity, cp; 
B-formation volume factor, bbl/STB; 
Bo-oil formation volume factor, bbl/STB; 
rw, eff-effective wellbore radius, ft; 
re, external drainage radius, ft;
ct-total compressibility, psi-1; 
S-skin factor;
Pi-reservoir pressure, psi; 
Pwf-bottomhole pressure, psi; 
?P- pressure depression, psi; 
?=1.781-Euler constant, dimensionless; 
FCD-dimensionless fracture conductivity;
wf-fracture width, in.

 BREAKS HERE

The problem with core matching is not new, and this field is not an exception, therefore the main objective of this project is to find the optimal method of core matching and to compare standard methods of log interpretation with the most optimal one. To begin with, it was necessary to solve the problem of core matching of porosity between the core and log data, since further matching of permeability and water saturation depends on porosity. As the experience of this work has shown, not always the traditional methods of core matching work, which is confirmed by the data obtained during the research. For example, standard formulas for finding effective porosity showed uncertain convergence of matching, therefore, combined porosity calculation methods consisting of neutron and density log were used. These formulas gave an improved result, but still not sufficient for further adaptation, so it was necessary to use an alternative approach to solve this problem. For this purpose Zalyayev's method was chosen and an algorithm was developed and tested to solve the problem of calculating the porosity of the Upper Jurassic reservoirs of the field K in conditions of an incomplete well logging complex. 
The permeability was matched by two methods for the U11 formation: the traditional porosity-permeability dependence was used, where there was a fairly confident convergence. For the U12 layer, the method of hydraulic flow units was used, since in this layer a poor correlation was observed by the traditional method. 
As for water saturation, core matching was based on the Archie equation. The result of this project is the calculations of all petrophysical parameters (porosity, permeability and water saturation) based on optimal methods matching. The choice of optimal methods of matching was based on the allocation of two layers and the application of various matching techniques to them.

Introduction
In order to more accurately represent the geological section and qualitatively determine the petrophysical properties of the formation, it is necessary to perform core sampling from the well, but it is not always possible to completely extract the required drilling interval [1, 2]. Also, when the core is removed to the surface, the properties of the rock and fluid differ significantly from the reservoir conditions, so the results of the core analysis do not give a complete presentation of the reservoir. But to determine some physical parameters this is enough (elasticity, porosity, permeability, various coefficients, etc.). But core removal is performed only at the initial stage of field development in exploration wells and sometimes during field development, therefore core sampling is replaced by downhole of geophysical tools that record physical parameters of rocks, and then logs are used to interpret log data with the help of which all petrophysical parameters can be determined. Therefore the core matching should be performed as more qualitatively as possible, in order to use the obtained petrophysical parameters and coupling equations, to obtain qualitative petrophysical parameters in the wells without core sampling and the application of these data in the geological model and then in the hydrodynamic one.

Core matching
In order to correctly determine the reservoir properties of rocks, it is necessary to take into account the influence of clay material, since they can substantially change the reservoir quality of rocks due to: mineral composition of clays, distribution type of clay minerals in rock and volume of clay in rock [6]. In this project volume of clay will be calculated with a help of V.V. Larionov model. This model is used for the calculation of shaliness and as experience shows, this formula most accurately describes the sandy-shale connection of the sections in Western Siberia [3]. Also this formula provides the best matching of porosity after correction for shaliness and reflects the regressive-transgressive section of the deposit
Vsh = 0.083*(23.7Igr -1)							
Where Igr = VshGR 
But initially gamma ray index should be calculated.
VshGR = (GR-?GR?_min)/(?GR?_max-?GR?_min )									
Where GR – reading from GR curve, GRmin – minimum value of curve corresponding to sand, GRmax – maximum value of curve corresponding to clay.

Porosity determination
To begin with, the porosity curve was calculated using the methods of density and neutron log. In order to use the density log porosity formula, it is necessary to determine the density of the matrix. for this purpose, the density dependence on porosity was constructed, from which the average density of the matrix were taken (the free coefficient in the equation) 2.6889 g/cc
?=(?_ma-?_b)/(?_ma-?_f )-Vsh (?_ma-?_sh)/(?_ma-?_f )							
Where  ?b – bulk density, ?ma – matrix density, ?sh – shale density è ?f – fluid density
This method of calculating the porosity shows the uncertain convergence of the formation evaluation and core data, average values of correlation coefficient vary in the range 0.45-0.55 as shown in the example of one of the wells Figure 1.

 
Figure 1 – Porosity correlation between core-FE
Then, using the neutron log method, the porosity was calculated from the formula
?_Neff=?_N-V_shSP•?_sh  								
Where ?_N total neutron porosity, V_sh- shaliness by Larionov model, ?_sh- shale porosity 
Since neutron log is given in the conventional units, it is necessary to transform it into porosity fractional units. For this purpose it is need to take values from the log curve from three reference layers such as tight sandstones, coal or clays and maximum porosity in the sandstone from core. After that construct the plot of dependance of NKT, conventional units and porosity fractional units. Values of porosity in reference layers can vary in range: for clays up to 0.45, for coal up to 0.45 and for tight sand 0.03-0.05 (fractional units) [3].
  
Figure 2 - correlation between neutron porosity and core data

After that, the dependence obtained from the three points is used to convert from conventional units to porosity units, where instead of X, a value is substituted for the neutron log ? ??_N= -0.1324*NKT + 0.6953. Thus, the porosity corrected for the shaliness obtained by neutron log gives an uncertain convergence between the core and logging (figure 2). Thus, summing up the subtotal, we can say that the use of traditional methods of calculation does not give a confident convergence of formation evaluation and core data, so we need to apply a different approach for better core matching.

Porosity matching by unconventional methods
Here we will consider methods of matching by using a combination of two methods, namely density (RHOB) and neutron (NKT) logs. The following methods can be applied in wells where the neutron and density logs are presented. Let's start with the model having the lowest correlation coefficient. The model take into account neutron, density log, saturation and type of the logging tool [9].
?=(??_N+??_D)/(1+?S_hr )  									
Where?_N-neutron porosity, ?_D-density porosity, S_hr=1-S_w, coefficients ?=0.22, ?=0.78, ?=0.1–for neutron CNL coefficients ?=0.28, ?=0.72, ?=0.1– for neutron SNP. Slightly better result has the formula [9].
 ?_D=1-(?_b-1)/?_ma 	 									
The best result among the combined formulas showed the average value of the neutron and density log [3]. It shows the correlation coefficient about 0.6. 
?_average  (?_D+?_N)/2  										
Where?_N-neutron porosity, ?_D-density porosity
As aresult the efficiency of the unconventional methods shows the average correlatoin coefficient in the range 0.55-0.6 it is better than conventional methods. The last method is the best from mentioned methods above, but its correlation coefficient and its curve profile are not sufficient, therefore we should use an alternative method of matching.

Table 1 – average values of correlation coefficients
 
Technique of N.Z. Zalyaev – reconstruction of density log from sonic and neutron log data
In the course of interpretation of formation evaluation data in this field the following trend was identified, the wells that have density and neutron logs show good correlation between core and log data, if these methods are applied separately for each layer. Density log shows good correlation if it is applied for the U11 formation (Figure 3), while neutron log shows good correlation when it is applied for the U12 formation (Figure 4). 
	As can be seen from the density log curve, it has a good correlation in the upper layer and a bad correlation in the lower layer. As for the neutron log it has a good correlation in the lower layer and a bad correlation in the upper layer. Due to the correlation coefficient is quite high the decision was made and both layers were matched separately by the different methods. 
	In case of layer U12  it has a good correlation when the neutron log is applied,and neutron log is presented in all wells, therefore the problem of matching of the lower layer is solved. But in case of layer U11, density log is not presented in all wells, therefore the problem can be solved by the development of the synthetic density log curve. 


 
Figure 3 – Cross-plot core vs FE data and density porosity curve
 
Figure 4 – Cross-plot core vs FE data and neutron porosity curve

In order to create synthetic density curve Zalyaev's method will be used. This method is based on the using of neutron log with the selection of normalization coefficients 'm' and 'k'. These coefficients are selected individually on the base of lithological information from core and log data [10].
?Tp=-90·Ln10(NK-k)+m Neutron log into Sonic log							
Where k and m: normalizing coefficients, NK – reading of neutron log
After that optimal coefficients are selected, synthetic density curve is constructed with a help of formula.
?pac= ?+Vshale	Sonic log into Density log										
Where: ?=aV_p^2+bV_p+c, Vshale – gamma ray index, Vp=1/?Tp·1000, and Greenberg-Castanian coefficients a,b,c that corresponds to lithology
In order to check the following method, we need to choose the well which has all required logs (neutron, sonic and density logs). In our case we have only one well that has sonic log (well ¹10) 
First of all the transformation from neutron log into the sonic was performed with a help of the formula, coefficients k and m were selected on the base of lithology. As a result correlation coefficient between the synthetic sonic curve and actual is high, about 0.9 for the layer U11. 
Then using the synthetic sonic curve, synthetic density log was constructed. The synthetic density curve reflects the actual curve behavior, and shows the correlation between them al level 0.7. After that synthetic density curve was used for the construction of the density porosity, where it shows the correlation 0.68 (Figure 5).
 
Figure.5 – correlation between synthetic density porosity vs core data (zone 3)

Then technique of N.Z. Zalyaev was checked in other wells. In other wells sonic log is not presented but density logs are presented in some wells. Using the individual coefficients k and m (table 2) for the ?Tp=-90·Ln10(NK-k)+m formula. 

Table 2- coefficients for 3 zones for equation ?Tp=-90·Ln10(NK-k)+m  

Thus, summing up, we can say that  the use of  Zalyaev's technique of calculation gives quite good correlation in wells. Average correlation coefficient equal to 0.62. But this technique quite well reconstruct the density log curve provided that acoustic logging is present as a reference log for the normalizing coefficients k and m, since the further behavior of the synthetic curve depends on them. Also we should have a geological description of the core for detailed lithology splitting which affect the final result. Therefore we need to offer a more reliable method of matching for wells in this field.

Creation of the synthetic density porosity curve
As it was shown earlier, density log has good correlation for the U11 formation. Therefore, it was decided to match with a help of density log. But since only 6 of the 15 wells have density log, the matching of the remaining wells is impossible. In order to create a curve reflecting the behavior of density porosity curve, the neutron and gamma ray log were used. Since these logs are presented in all wells. The curve which will can reflects the behavior of density porosity curve can be calculated by formula ?ds=xNPHI/I_gr -V_sh  (?_ma-?_sh)/(?_ma-?_f ), since when neutron porosity is divided by gamma ray log then each of these logs takes into account the lithological composition of the rocks in the section. Accordingly, when we use the function  in which these logs are present, we distinguish lithological features by all the methods used.
Where: ?ds- synthetic density porosity, NPHI- neutron porosity that is calculated from the dependence of conventional units and fractional units, Igr- gamma ray index, ?ma – matrix density, ?sh – shale density è ?f – fluid density and Vsh – shaliness calculated by Larionov method, x-  zone dependent correction coefficient. 
With a help of equation  xNPHI/I_gr   we can achieve a repeat of the density porosity trend and correction coefficients 'x' help to control the position of the curve since the ratio overestimate or underestimate the core data. Coefficients 'x' were chosen by an iterative method individually for each zone. Facial zones were taken from geological description of the field. The field has three facial zones (figure 6): the first zone corresponds to coastal-marine depositional enviroment, the second zone is tidal deposits and third zone are marshland and swamp. The coefficient 'X' are 0.55, 0.37 and 0.35 respectievly. 
In order to check the equation the wells which have both a neutron log and density log were used from each facial zone (14,17,10). When the equation was applied the constructed curve reflects the behavior of the density porosity curve and the correlation coefficient shows a good correlation between the synthetic curve and core data, also this correlation coefficient is similar to the coefficient obtained by the original density curve. Therefore, it can be applied in wells where there is no density logging. As can be seen from the plots the equation gives good correlation coefficients in the range 0.65-0.7
 
Figure 6 - facies map

Permeability matching
The permeability prediction is as important as the porosity matching, if in the second case the porosity has a very strong effect on the reserves and, accordingly, on the economy of the project, then in the first case permeability prediction is very imoprtant for the futher simulation model. The error in permeability is critical for the development strategy since it has a large effect on the oil rate and production operations. Therefore the accurate permeability prediction is necessary.  In order to have a good correlation between the core permeability and predicted one, the following parameters should be taken into account. Good correlation between the calculated and core porosity since the conventional method of permeability prediction has the dependence (porosity-permeability relationship)- y=aeb? and a good correlation between the core porosity and permeability [6]. The field has two zones which are confirmed by geological description and FE data, the first zone is U11 and U12.  In the first case the permeability prediction was performed by conventional method i.e. by porosity-permeability relationship y=0.0316e41.006x. For the second layer conventional method gives bad predicted permeability and Hydraulic Flow Units approach was applied.
Permeability matching of U11
First of all the relationship (porosity-permeability) was constructed (Figure 7), after that the equation was applied for the prediction of permeability. The correlation between the predicted and core permeability show a good correlation coefficient above 0.7 
 
Figure 7 - core porosity-permeability relationship

This approach is classical, but its implementation shows that because of dispersion of the coefficients of the coupling equations, the predicted permeability values can  be determined with a sufficiently large error. In some cases, there is a fairly reliable correlation of permeability with data from various formation evaluation methods. For example, in the literature, a large number of experimental statistical equations for the relationship of permeability with normalized values of the SP field (?SP) or gamma ray index of the field of natural gamma activity are presented. But the effect of these equations is limited to particular fields [6].
More general variants of the permeability prediction proposed by specialists require taking into account the residual water saturation of rocks, the determination of which according to the formation evaluation data also depends on the chosen calculation models and is problematic. Nevertheless, the most frequently recommended equations are: Tixier, Timur and Coates. Application of these equations show correlation at the level 0.5 therefore conventional method of prediction of permeability was chosen.

HFU approach for U¬12 formation
HFU approach was described in the section literature review. As can be seen from the plot 8 where the conventional method of permeability prediction (blue curve) shows a poor correlation between the calculated and core permeability, although porosity - permeability relationship has a good correlation. Therefore unconventional method will be used (HFU), which gives a good correlation (figure 8).  red curve.

 
Figure 8 - conventional and FZI method of prediction of permeability

Classification of reservoir types by core data
Since the concept of hydraulic units implies that there are a limited number of reservoir types which characterized by a unique mean value of FZI and the spread of FZI values around the mean, is caused by random experimental errors. Therefore first of all, it is necessary to determine the number of such types of the reservoir and the boundary FZI for each of them. For this purpose, all available experimental data of core and a lot of graphical and analytical methods can be used. In this project the following methods were used:
As described earlier in the literature review, there are many methods for allocation of hydraulic flow units. In this project three methods were used.
Modified Lorenz plot which is an analogue of inflow profile. Breaks on the plot correspond to reservoir type change. For this purpose, the filtration characteristic of the reservoir is constructed along the y-axis i.e. ?-kjhj and storage capacity is constructed along the x-axis ?-?jhj. Construct the plot Fj=(?-kjhj)/(?-kihi) vs Cj=(?-?jhj)/(?-?ihi)  [15]. The graph shows the number of hydraulic flow units over all wells. These data should be plotted on a linear plot as on Figure 9. Figure shows the number of hydraulic flow units in the reservoir. As can be seen from the plot 9 almost all wells have a poor reservoir properties at the lowest part. It can be confirmed by the geological description of the field since the lower part of layer U12 has a poor reservoir properties.
 
Figure 9 - Modified Lorenz plot for all wells

Graphical analysis of RQI vs normalized porosity on log-log plot. The points lying on a straight line of unit slope can be characterised as one HFU (Figure 10). As can be seen from the plot, reservoir can be splitted into 4 hydraulic flow units. The deterioration of HFU occurs from top to bottom (from 1 to 4)

 
Figure 10- RQI vs Ôz

Core data analysis – the analysis and description of core data was performed in 8 wells, the detailed core description helped to define hydraulic flow units and confirm it. To sum up, core analysis and graphical methods provide a sufficient information about the number of reservoir units which can help to predict permeability more accurate. Conducted core and structure analysis supplement classification with sedimentological meaning. Table shows (table 3) HFU that correspond to different facies. 1st unit is presented with medium grained sandstone with massive structure. Last reservoir unit is presented with fine grained sandstone with interlayering of siltstone. 4 unit is non-reservoirs and appear as cut-off criteria for this layer. 
Table 3 -Average characteristics for HFU
 

Prediction of permeability for uncored wells
After the definition of reservoir types quantity in cored wells with description there is an issue on how to predict FZI values for uncored or wells without core description. Available data in these wells is log data. Thus, correlation matrices between presented logs and calculated FZI were constructed [13]. On the base of correlation coefficients multiple linear regression with 3 predictors and 3 conditions was obtained. 3 conditions of porosity were used in order to increase the correlation coefficient between the FZI and log. For this purpose porosity was sorted on three groups (?18%;14-18% and<14%) [20]. The predictors were GR, ILD, and GZ2, according to which a multiple linear regression was constructed.
On the base of obtained predictors multiple linear regression was constructed.
FZI= a*GR+b*ILD+c*GZ2 									(3.6.5.1)
Where a, b, c ={-((-0.4012;0.01298;0.00366) if porosity?18%@(0.118;0.0095;0.0057) if porosity 14-18%@(0.1392;0.03325;0.00381) if porosity<14%)+

After that the regression was obtained, it was checked in wells where core description is not presented, the results are shown below. Also the regression was applied in cored well for checking (R2=0.71) see example of well 16, where blue curve- FZI core black – FZI predicted (fig. 11). 
 
Figure 11- comparison of predictd FZI and FZI core.

To sum up, the field has 2 layers which has different reservoir properties, in the first layer permeability was predicted by the conventional method. As for the second layer, conventional method is not appropriate since it gives a poor correlation between the cora and calculated data. Therefore HFU method was used. 4 hydraulic units with unique average FZI values were defined. For permeability prediction modified Carmen-Kozeny equation was used.

Matching of water saturation
Fluid saturation of reservoirs is the volume of pore space filled with formation water, oil and gas. The  water saturation  determined by the coefficient which is equal to the ratio of the pore volume occupied by the fluid to the total pore volume. In order to determine water saturation coefficients a m n should be determined with a help of particular relationships. Coefficients a and m are determined by the porosity- formation factor relationship where coefficient a – tortuosity coefficient and m – cementation coefficient.
As a result coefficients a and m are equal to 1.5917 and 1.435 respectively. After that coefficients were determined, coefficient n- water saturation exponent should be calculated with a help of relationship water saturation – resistivity index. Coefficient n = 1.997
The next parameter that is needed to determine the water saturation is the formation water resistance. Resistivity of formation water was obtained on the base of chemical analysis reservoir fluid probe and formation temperature. During the analysis of data the water salinity was calculated  (29890ppm at reservoir temperature 92 C) for future identification of resestivity of water. Obtained resistivity equal 0.08 Ohm*m. During determination of resistivity charts Gen-8 and Gen-9 was used (Schlumberger ©).
The last step before water saturation determination is correction of induction log for skin effect. This procedure was performed in Prime software. When the preparation was performed water saturation can be calculated. In this project the most effective equation for water saturation estimation is Archi equation (average R2=0.7), while other models for Sw estimation have much less correlation coefficient (Simandoux, Poupon and Indonesian model).
Archi model: 		Sw= v(n&aRw/(ô^m R_t )) 							
Where: a – tortuosity coefficient ,m – cementation coefficient, n- water saturation exponent,Rw- resistivity of water, Rt-formation resistivity, ô- effective porosity.

Conclusion
An algorithm was developed and tested to solve the problem of calculating the porosity of the Upper Jurassic reservoirs of the field K in conditions of an incomplete well logging complex. On the basis of hydraulic flow units, a mathematical apparatus is constructed that allows predicting permeability in the absence of core. The calculations of all petrophysical parameters (porosity, permeability and water saturation) based on optimal methods of  core matchig. The choice of optimal methods of matching was based on the separation of two layers and the application to them of various matching techniques.
The layer U11. Porosity matching – density log. Permeability matching – conventional method.
The layer U12. Porosity matching – neutron log. Permeability matching – HFU.
Matched data in the future can be applied to the construction of a geological and hydrodynamic model.  Also HFU method takes into account high-permeability interlayers. This fact can be taken into account in the hydrodynamic model and try to avoid premature breakout of water by various methods. Also prepared ready-made tablets on which one can see a repeat of the trend of porosity, permeability and water saturation. 
The result of this project is the fact that an optimal methodology for the matching of porosity data has been found . Since a comparative analysis of different porosity calculation methods revealed that none of them gives reliable convergence with core data, therefore a formula describing the behavior of the porosity curve calculated from the density log was derived. And with the help of correction coefficients that depend on the zone of the deposit, it was possible to achieve good correlation of the porosity. Since the porosity matching affects futher matching of permeability and water sauration data, so we must suggest a method of matching that gives the highest correlation coefficient. Therefore, this method of porosity matching for the U11 formation of this field can be recommended. This work has an important practical significance, since in this field there is not density logging in all wells, and the definition of petrophysical parameters directly affects the further calculation of the field's reserves, and accordingly, on the economics of the project.

Acknowledgements
I would like to thank to my supervisor from Heriot - Watt (Tomsk) Mikhail Korovin. Mikhail is a good specialist in geophysical well logging and thanks to his experience and recommendations it became possible to carry out this project.



 
 BREAKS HERE

In the recent years, oil-rim reservoirs got more and more into the focus of potential development projects due the latest advancements of horizontal drilling technologies. Nevertheless, as appealing as those new development prospects might seem, they involve high challenges and risk potential, which can be expected during the production period, such as severe water and gas coning, just to mention two of them. By giving a first and general overview of various methods of problem prevention and mitigation, this thesis will later on mainly focus on optimal well placement and completions designs, which will be more suitable for those demanding reservoir characteristics. The provided reservoir information and also the current development plan, including details of the technical applications, were used to analytically screen out the most perspective optimization strategies. The remaining selection of possible methods were then simulated and approved in a hydrodynamic model. After assessing the outcomes of the analytical and numerical approach, the results were being discussed based on geological and technological risks and uncertainties and economic viability. The surprising result of the investigation was that so called autonomous inflow control devices (AICD) could be used to complete a new horizontal production section very close to the gas cap and thus postponing the water breakthrough from the aquifer without risking a high gas production from the gas cap.
Introduction
In the past decades, oil-rim reservoirs were widely considered as marginal reserves, which involved high project risks, due to their relatively thin oil columns and complex reservoir drive mechanisms. In such reservoir types, the net pay zone, is typically “sandwiched” as a thin layer between an active aquifer and a gas cap, giving a high likelihood of severe gas and water production problems during an early development stage, including a high tendency of an early gas or water breakthrough. Due to the low recovery factor, which could be expected from oil-rim reservoirs economic viability studies were able, if at all, to justify only the cheaper and simpler applications concerning drilling technologies and completion designs, which by now are known to cause more harm than good in the later life field development.
The growing awareness of the decline in easy oil in combination with the need for more efficient development concepts due to the low oil price environment since 2014 may have triggered a merely sensible consideration of oil-rim exploitation. The new trend to a more sustainable development philosophy was also reason for the rise of so called fit for purpose technologies. Particularly in terms of low ROI development projects the application of those technologies can be critical to zero out the risk of sudden project failure due to an unexpected rise of technical problems, of which only two of them have just been mentioned [2].
In this context, an actual not viable oil-rim development project has been provided to conduct a thorough analysis of possible oil recovery enhancement possibilities. Therefore, the previous successful application of so called autonomous inflow control devices (AICDs) of former development projects, was reason to reconsider its application in more detail. The question is in which reservoir setting and with which configurations the AICDs can be expected to be particularly successful in the given field study. After carefully assessing the outcomes of the analytical and numerical approaches, the results are being discussed based on geological and technological risks and uncertainties and economic viability.
2 SPE Number
Description of Oil Field X
The provided oil field example is located in the Volgograd region in Russia and was discovered in 2007. The reservoir target formation is the Bobrikovskian horizon (C1-2bb) which features good reservoir characteristics with 18 % porosity and high horizontal permeability of 760mD (kv/kh=0.71). The oil column thickness ranges from 0.5 to 7 m and is located between a 4 m thick gas cap above and an approximately 40 m thick active aquifer below (see provided cross-section in appendix 1). The GOC contact and WOC are located at -1906.3 m and 1913.3 m, respectively. As the existent gas cap is rather small in size the reservoir drive mechanism is characterized by a natural water drive mechanism. The oil can be classified as light with an in-situ density of 0.698 t/m3 and an in-situ viscosity of 0.551 mPa*s which is very close to the formation water viscosity. The oil initially in place are expected to be 1048 Mt with gas initially in place of 260MMm3.
Production started in 2013 with the last (out of 7) production well completed in 2015. The field development has experienced several setbacks during the still young field development. For example, during production drilling it turned out that the northern culmination of the structure is smaller than previously mapped. The impact on the in-place volumes was a reduction of about 35%.
In addition to that, shortly after the start-up of the field it became clear that all horizontal wells produce at expected rates but that the percentage of water and gas in the produced fluid mixture is much higher than anticipated, and therefore the percentage of oil much less.
Moreover, already two wells closed production within a year long time window due to exceeding the water cut limit of 99%. In total, up to recent this resulted in an oil reserves reduction by 630 Mt. At the moment, a total of 98 Mm3 of oil has been recovered with an average water cut of 50 % and an oil recovery factor of 3.5. According to this, several attempts to reduce the water production, e.g. through polymer injection had been tried but resulted only in little to no success due its insufficient short time effect.
The main technological reason for the negative project economics besides the OIIP-overestimation and an underestimation of the apparent production risk and uncertainties of thin oil-rim reservoirs was to a very high extant the actual rotary drilling technology. Due to the very thin oi column the impact of an unprecise and uneven well trajectory had a dramatically negative impact on the production behavior of the horizontal section. As the application of rotary drilling can involve undesired well deviations of 3-5m the production section is subjected to a high risk of water accumulations restricting the production flow or even missing the target depth and accidently producing within the transition. Although this might be one of the worst-case scenarios, it clarifies how the risk of a premature water and gas breakthrough will be accelerated by this issue, too.
Calculations and Experimental Procedure
There exist several different geometrical realizations of AICDs. The levitating disc type will be further considered during this thesis and is presented in figure 3b. The mode of operation uses the Bernoulli principle. The principle is based on dynamic pressure differences, which again react on pressure drops due to higher flow velocities. As water, oil and gas have different viscosities and densities, also different flow behaviors will be observed influenced by the type of fluid. Therefore, water and especially gas with lower viscosities cause higher flow velocities along the valve and thus a higher pressure drop then oil, which will then result in an upwards movement of the disc which will choke the fluid influx. A simplified equation (4.1) of the principle is given below [19].
??1+12??????12=??2+12??????22+???????????????????
It is obvious that this principal causes the low viscous fluid pass through the AICD with less resistance while for the case with an ICD this would be the opposite. By conducting several empirical studies on the performance of the AICD an analytical function has been developed. This function basically expresses that the pressure drop that is experiences in the AICD is a function of the fluid characteristics and the flow rate.
????=(????????2????????2)?(????????????????)??????????????????
Where y is x and y are input constants specified by the AICD provider, a the AICD-strength, which is dependent on the expected inflow, q the flow rate of the heterogeneous reservoir fluid, ?_cal^ and ?_cal the calibration density and viscosity and ?_mix^ and ?_cal defined as:
????????=?????????????????+?????????????????????????+?????????????????
????????=?????????????????+?????????????????????????+?????????????????
where ? is the volumetric fraction of the fluid.
SPE Number 3
The performance or efficiency of AICD applications may vary significantly in terms of the oil field characteristics. Therefore, the evaluation of an AICD candidate should be considered in term of the two factors – the fluid properties and the flow rate. The fluid properties are an important factor as the AICD will perform very well with high viscosity contrasts. Therefore, gas in general will be always choked by the device, but the AICD performance in a setting of low viscous oil and water, the separation performance will be less than in a reservoir setting with high viscous oil. The other factor is the flow rate which is determent to change (decrease) during the field life. As the device actual size and the AICD strength for instance will be calibrated toward an expected production rate the declining rates after the production plateau can be identified as a factor of steadily decreasing efficiency of the AICD [18,20].
Taking into account equation (4.3) to (4.5) and the information being given right above it becomes apparent that the definition of the correct landing TVD within the oil column moves back into the center of attention particularly in the context of AICD application. The TVD issue might be of very high importance for the AICD configurations as each zone between the GOC and WOC is characterized by different inflow and coning behavior. For instance, as it is now known that the separation efficiency is a function of the fluid property and production rate it has to be investigated within which vertical interval the control device achieves the best results depending on the fact whether the device can handle larger influx of water or gas.
Based on the findings of the previous chapter, the focus will now move to several solution proposals to determine an optimal well landing TVD first for an open hole situation and later on for the AICD specific cases. To satisfy this purpose three analytical methods will be reviewed and later applied in the context of the given oil field example. This chapter will be introduced with some basic ideas and principals, of which the chosen methods make use of [22]. Water and gas coning nowadays still presents a serious production related problem. Although the pressure drop along the horizontal well is significantly lower than in comparison with a vertical well, the horizontal well section, especially near the heel can be affected seriously by a gas or water breakthrough. Likely results might be rapid loss of the gas cap drive energy, snipping of the breakthrough unaffected horizontal production section between the heel and toe, additional lifting and water treatment costs and thus a general lower oil recovery. The coning behavior of the respective fluid is mainly dependent on the gravity contrast of the two fluids and its viscosity forces relating to the frictional forces between the two fluids. With higher than critical oil production rates those friction forces become higher than the gravity force and pulls the undesirable fluid slowly closer to the production section. Another factor that influences the coning effect is the anisotropy of the formation [21,22]. Obviously, a low vertical to horizontal permeability relationship causes less chances for rapid coning then values with high vertical to horizontal permeability relationships where the high vertical permeabilities allow for rapid vertical movement of formation water. Another problem with water and gas breakthroughs is the fact, that the water cut and gas oil ratios will rise with time, due to the changing relative permeabilities.
As it is not apparent, that water or gas breakthrough rapidly decreases oil production rates, it is the time before the breakthrough that should be tried to be extended. Lowering the oil production rate is one possibility to decrease the coning tendency, although can be limited due to the project economics. Selecting the right well landing TVD is therefore a preferred strategy. The optimal vertical well location can thus be defined as the depth at which the gas and water breakthrough would be theoretically happen at the same time[25].
The literature provides a wide range of different critical rate correlation for horizontal wells to estimate the maximal oil production rate that can be defined for a certain well by limiting the coning tendency. Nevertheless, those correlations can also be used to find the optimal well placement, which will be conducted in relation to the given field example in the analytical part of this report. Beforehand, the most applicable methods are introduced in the following.
Chaperon’s Method
This method was developed in 1986 and gives an easy and fast estimation for critical oil production rates for anisotropic reservoir characteristics under (pseudo)-steady-state flow regime. The following equation 5.1 and 5.2 represent the developed relationship between critical oil rate and the horizontal well configuration at given reservoir parameters [22].
Gas Cresting
Qgas,crit=0.0783?10?4 ?(l???)?(?oil??gas)?kh?[h?(h??GOC)]2?o?Bo
Water Cresting
????????,????????=0.0783?10?4 ?(???????)?(?????????????????????)?????[??(?????????)]2?????????
4 SPE Number
Where ?GOC and ??????? OWC are the vertical distances of the horiztonal well away from the correspondend pressre boundary. Q is the critical rate, ? the fluid density, k the permeability, ? the half drainage length, l the horizontal well length and ? the dimensionless correlations coeffitient.
The two equations show that the critical rate strongly depends on the density contrast of oil and the unwanted fluid. Thus, higher possible critical rates could be estimated in terms of gas coning and lower critical rates related to water coning. Other observation are that the critical rate increases with higher horizontal permeabiliy and oil thickness values and decreases with an increasing viscosity.
Papatzacos’ Method
The second method that was applied during the individual project was the method of Papatzacos. This method already takes into considurations a simulanious pressure boundary from the gas cap and the aquifer below. The given equations do not only enable to determine the most efficient well placement but also the actual simultanous gas and water breakthrough time. The optimal well location and the corresponding breakthrough depend firstly on the dimensonless flow rate Q_D and the density contrast ? [21]:
????=325.86??o?Bo????????v????????????(?oil??gas)
??= ??????????????????????oil??gas
In correlation with the density contrast the corresponding coefficients for equation 5.7 and 5.8 have to be chosen from the tables in appendix 5.7 and 5.8
??=????+??1?ln(????)+??2?[ln(????)]2+??3?[ln(????)]3 (5.7)
????????=??????+??1?ln(????)+??2?[ln(????)]2+??3?[ln(????)]3 (5.8)
Wagenhofer Method
The third and the last analytical approach, which can be applied to estimate the optimal well placement TVD is presented by the method of Wagenhofer et al. Also, his work was based on Papatzacos’s semil-analytical solution. Wagenhofer, nevertheless, used a simulation model to optimize Papatzacos’s correlation. This has been done by initially locating the horizontal well at the center of the oil column (b = 0,5). Then, Wagenhofer adjusted the well location several times in correspondence to the breakthrough time of each water and gas until the location was found where a simultaneous breakthrough of water and gas has been observed. In addition to that, the author conducted a thorough sensitivity analysis on various reservoir parameters to figure out which of them have the strongest impact on the breakthrough time.
??=0.7954???????0.1569???????0.0335???????0.0662????0.1143???????0.0742???????0.0835
The results that Wagenhofer collected during the development of this new method was that the horizontal permeability barely influenced the well location whereas the aquifer size, mobility ratios, production interval length fluid densities and viscosities and of course the flow rate have a significant impact on the optimal well TVD [22].
Results and Discussion
The analytical methods for the TVD estimations will now be used with the given reservoir information. As the minimal length for the AICD application is 300 m [12] an additional length of 100 m is added some certainty to the calculation.
As Chaperon provided two equations 5.1 and 5.2 each for the gas and water coning, those equations can now be used in combination a semi-analytical method for optimal TVD estimation. The idea is to plot both function of each equation with
SPE Number 5
?_GOC and ?_OWC as input parameters. The intersection of both function can be defined as the location of a simultanious water and gas breackthrough.
The point of interception of the resulting plot shows the simultaneous critical rate (qoc) for water and gas coning, and a corresponding optimum horizontal well placement (hopt), respectively. The critical production rate at which both the water and gas fluids cone simultaneously into the well is the pre-breakthrough time, which cumulative oil production is maximized.
The results of this first analytical approach which is being discussed here is shown in table 6.1. From the table, as well as from the plotted diagram it becomes clear that the water coning phenomenon happens much faster as compared to gas coning. This is mainly due to the smaller density difference between water and oil.
Correspondingly, at the graph can be seen that the interception of the critical rate of the gas coning case and the water coning case is located at about 0.68, which stands for a 3.5 m distance from the OWC in the case of oil field X. Moreover, the diagram gives useful information about the fluid production rate that should be aimed for during field development. A total of 120 m3/d can be defined as the value that provides the maximal production rate with the longest pre-breakthrough period. To simplify the comparison with the second and third analytical approach the production rate value obtained from the Chaperon method is used as a benchmark for further calculations.
This time for Papatzacos’ method the reservoir data for field X is used to conduct the analytical method of finding an ideal landing TVD, which is presented by Papatzacos. The results of the correspondent breakthrough time gained from this method are presented in the next in figure 6.1.
By analyzing the breakthrough time it becomes apparent that the critical rate can be expected in the range between 0 and 70 m3/d. For all values higher then this a rapid breakthrough time can be expected. The finding of this method severely mismatch with the previous method described. The associated diagram describing the critical rate-TVD relationship gives some contradictory results, as the rate interval of 0-70 m3/day gives TVD values higher than one, describing a position above the GOC.
Nevertheless, using the predefined production rate value of 120 the estimated position for an ideal well placement is 94% above OWC level. This value is 26% higher than the value calculated by the previous method. The value of 94% in the given reservoir case represents only a distance of 26 cm from the GOC, which can be practically interpreted as the actual GOC
The optimized method of Wagenhofer will now be applied as the last of the three TVD estimation methods. As this method considers a wider range of input data as can be seen from equation 5.9 to 5.18, results with a more precision should be expected. The results are shown in the following figure 6.4.
The estimated well landing TVD following the method of Wagenhofer and for the pre-defined production rate of 120 m3/d can be defined at 0.81 which in terms of the reservoir data presents a vertical distance from the OWC of 4.2 or in other words 1 m away from the GOC. This method gives a result that is arranged between the two previous methods. Also as the Wagenhofer method is a modification of Papatzacos’ method, the results could be interpreted as a corrected version that more accounts for vertical and relative permeabilities.
Now, after the application of analytical methods to define the optimal TVD location for the horizontal production section to reach an optimal production behavior from the well, this results are now verified in a given hydrodynamic model.
Numerical Verification Concerning an Optimal TVD Selection
The simulation programs used for the numerical analysis are Petrel and TNavigator. Petrel is used to model the oil rim and its water and gas coning effect in a well that was being “set-up” along different TVD depths between the active aquifer and the relatively small gas cap. A life oil model was used that consists of 344760 blocks and 7 already existing wells with relevant history data. The 3-dimensional cartesian grid system is characterized by 65 blocks in X-direction, 102 blocks in Y-direction and 52 blocks in Z-direction. The ninth well is the planed well, which was tested and calibrated for an optimal well configuration. The reservoir model is characterized by a homogeneous and relatively isotropic oil zone. Friction losses along the production zone were assumed as negligible. A total of 4 different, equally distributed TVD options were chosen, b =0.25, b = 0.5, b =0.75 and b = 1 right on the GOC. This distribution, first of all, will prove or disprove the pre-defined well TVD and in addition to that provides a sufficient heterogeneity in influx behaviour in terms of the different fluid factions flowing through the AICD. The results are presented in the following chart.
The simulation results describing the production behaviour are relatively quiet straight forward. The well location the furthest away from the OWC is the one with the longest production behaviour. The well that is only 1.3 m (b = 0.25) away from the OWC even closes down already after two years due to water cut exceeding 98 %. Diagrams describing the GOR and water cut comparison between the well locations are presented in the following. Being in conformity with figure 6.6 the GOR comparison shows that within the 5.2 m the wells with increasing distance from the WOC will experience the longest production periods. This is mainly due to the fixed well shut down due to water cut exceeding the limit of 98%. The cumulative oil production is shown in table 6.3.
6 SPE Number
By comparing the results of the analytical solutions with those gathered together from the simulation runs it can be concluded that the optimal well position should be located within the upper 80 % of the oil column. Papatzacos’ method was able to predict the breakthrough time more or less correctly within a time window of 0-20 moth of production. A simultaneous gas and water breakthrough is only observed at the centre of the NPZ (b = 0.5). The location below at b = 0.25 naturally experiences the fastest and strongest water breakthrough but is not being affected of any gas breakthrough within the first 3 years of production. The earliest gas breakthrough is logically experienced at the GOC with an already very high GOR of 2500m3/m3. In general, it can be said that in terms of a simultaneous breakthrough time of oil and gas a central position within the NPZ should be chosen. The correlation of Chaperon in comparison to all other analytical methods gives the best results. The reason why all of the applied analytical methods achieve relatively bad matches with the simulation model can be partly justified due to the very small distance the cone has to develop to reach the well, which are about 2.5 m and the relatively high vertical permeability. The short time period that is needed for the breakthrough might add justification for the unprecise results.
Nevertheless, following the strategy of locating the well at the centre of the net pay zone would result in only 70Mm3 cumulative oil production in comparison to 126Mm3. Of course, this would be at the cost of higher gas production. In general, it can be stated that an early water breakthrough represents a far more serious problem to the oil production rate then gas. As oil production at high levels is to be pursued, locations above the location b=0.5 will therefore move further in the centre of attention concerning the AICD application
Selection of the Best AICD Configuration
The same hydrodynamic model with the same TVD positions was chosen to define the optimal AICD configuration. The selection will be based on two configuration parameters – the distribution and the TVD location. The results obtained from the simulation runs will be first discussed and then compared against each other.
The framework for the first configuration parameter was defined by three possible AICD distributions along each TVD. The formation permeability was chosen to be the factor of impact concerning the inflow behaviour. Thus, the first case scenario was characterized by an AICD-installation only within the low-permeability zones. The second case describes the situation where AICD were installed only in high-permeability zones and last but not least the last case provides an AICD distribution of maximal density along the total horizontal interval of 400m. To clarify the effect of the AICD the same intervals are simulated a second time with perforations instead of AICDs. The two cases are compared and analysed in the following.
The table 8.1 presents the percentage difference of cumulated water and gas production for each case. The chosen time interval that was used for the comparison is defined as the time from production start until the shutdown of the first of both wells.
By carefully analysing the given table 8.1, it seems that a global trend of the correct AICD distribution is not distinguishable throughout the different production TVDs. Location b=1 seems to present optimal separation conditions in high permeability zones, in location b=0,75 the AICD seems to work the best along the total horizontal section and in location b=0,5 the AICD works the most efficient within the low permeability zone. To better understand the facts of cause concerning the results the water cut and GOR relevant information is provided in the following diagrams for further analysis. To simplify the upcoming explanation only the location b=0,75 was selected to provide the respective diagrams.
Figure 8.1 shows the water and gas cut behaviour of the low permeability case. It can be seen that both the water cut and GOR can be reduces by the AICD in general. In terms of the water coning behaviour it can be observed that the water breakthrough could be able to be postponed by roughly a one year time period. Moreover, also after the water breakthrough has happened, the water cut is in average 1-3 % lower. In term of the GOR the device shows its real capacities by effectively reducing gas production. In the given scenario, it is apparent that the gas breakthrough has already happened. Nevertheless, the AICD is able to choke the gas influx especially well while the gas inflow is still high. Beyond the gas influx peak the flow rate decreases and the AICD seems to lose its separation efficiency to a small extend.
By installing the AICD into the high-permeability zone the inflow of water is much higher due to the higher permeability. In the given diagram the water cut rises even faster with the AICD than with a standard perforation. This situation should not be overinterpreted but it gives reason for the assumption that the device is not able to handle a high water influx. Considering the diagrams 8.2 and 8.3 it can be said that the separation efficiency continues shrinking as more AICD units are installed into high permeability zones.The described tendency of reducing AICD separation efficiency was observed throughout almost all simulation runs. The cases with an extreme separation efficiency above have to be seen critically as in most of those cases the reason for such results were justified by higher production rates of the perforated production section that also caused a faster water breakthrough, while the AICD completion produced at smaller rates and therefore was able to postpone the breakthrough, although procing also comparable high volumes of water after the first well had closed down. Therefore, the investigation comes to the conclusion that the AICDs should be installed within the low-permeability zones. Producing through the low permeability zones is justified through a later water breakthrough due to the less amount of water flowing through the smaller pores.
SPE Number 7
TVD Selection for the AICD Application
The configuration of the AICD contribution is only the half of the overall fit-for-purpose configuration. The next and final step of the investigation deals with the right choice of the production TVD. The location of the production well along the vertical plane of the oil column has a significant effect on the type of fluid being dominant concerning the inflow through the device. As the ideal configuration is defined as the case with the highest separation efficiency and of course the final cumulative production of oil at the end of the production period, the following table 9.1 aims to give a short overview of the simulation results. The table states clearly that the optimal configuration for maximizing the cumulative oil production can be found in the low-permeability zones at the gas oil contact. The results of location b=0,75 within the high-permeability zone comes close in terms of oil production but has a significant downside with regards to a three times higher water production. Figures 9.1-9.2 clarify the production behaviour of the most relevant low-permeability scenarios.
Starting with the well location at the gas cap the given diagram shows that higher initial oil production can be achieved with a simple perforation completion. However, this is followed by faster decline of the yearly production levels as it is the case for the AICD completion. Also, the production period with the perforation strategy ends already at the mid term of the investigation period. On the contrary the AICD completion starts with a lower annual production rate, which is mainly caused by the pressure drop along the device, but manages to keep stable production rates until 2043. This can be explained mainly to the higher reservoir pressure which is being maintained through a longer period as far less gas and water is produced.
Starting with the well location at the gas cap the given diagram shows that higher initial oil production can be achieved with a simple perforation completion. However, this is followed by faster decline of the yearly production levels as it is the case for the AICD completion. Also, the production period with the perforation strategy ends already at the mid term of the investigation period. On the contrary the AICD completion starts with a lower annual production rate, which is mainly caused by the pressure drop along the device, but manages to keep stable production rates until 2043. This can be explained mainly to the higher reservoir pressure which is being maintained through a longer period as far less gas and water is produced.
Of all cases, the scenario at (b=0,5) makes clear to what extend the AICD application can prevent a well shut down due to high water cut. As the perforated well stops producing after the water has broken through already after the second year the AICD chokes the water to such an extend that a cumulative reduction of 64 % is being achieved. Also, given the lower gas influx the AICD is able to separate about 80 % of the gas, which would have been produced without this new technological application.
Conclusion
1. The application of autonomous inflow control devices and its optimal parameter calibration was to be conducted, with special focus on well landing TVD and AICD module distribution along the horizontal production section.
2. The analysis has shown that choosing the right well landing TVD has not only a significant influence on the breakthrough time and coning behaviour, but also on the separation efficiency of the AICD.
3. The analytical methods applied for the analysis came to the conclusion that the highest cumulative oil production could be expected in the upper half of the net pay zone.
4. The location was further specified by simulation runs involving AICD completions which confirmed an optimal well placement very close to the gas oil contact. This location was mainly justified due to the fact that the new device is very sensitive to fluid density and viscosity contrasts the optimal well placement.
5. Moreover, distribution analysis have been conducted by simulating the AICD production intervals within intervals of different permeability characteristics. The result was that the device significantly better works in zones with low permeabilities. This result was obtained by analysing the separation efficiency of gas and water.
6. A higher overall cumulative oil production was achieved due to a more equalized production regime and postponed water breakthrough.
7. The applicability of this new technological approach for the given thin-oil rim reservoir is being rated as critical. The reservoir does not possess the ideal surrounding this type of inflow control devices and thus a significant production enhancement is very likely not to be achieved. Nevertheless, the technology can be of very high interest for oil-rim projects that are still at the appraisal stage, because the wells should be equipped directly with the AICD completion.
8 SPE Number
 BREAKS HERE

Nowadays, efficient field development cannot be imagined without the integrated interpretation of field data, obtained from core samples, logging operations and formation testers. The above mentioned methods allow reservoir permeability definition.  During the interpretation of well logs the absolute value of permeability can be estimated by means of the empirical equation, obtained from core measurement database. This equation characterizes flow properties of dry reservoir towards air or neutral gas, which appear to be the non-wetting phase in relation to reservoir rock. Then, the absolute value of permeability, which can be obtained from log curves, can be applied in the simulation modeling. However, the obtained value may not exactly describe the process of fluid flow through the porous media. For quantitative description of field development parameters the value of permeability should reflect the fluid flow dynamics. Therefore, the creation of a workflow, which may provide normalization of core and therefore log absolute permeability on its field values, estimated from formation testing operations, is of great importance. 

The workflow creation was based on the data, which was available for the object of study – Field B, which is located in the south-west part of the Gydan peninsula, Western Siberia Russia. First of all, the absolute permeability values were reassessed taking into account the shaliness volume distribution, which influences the petrophysical properties of Field B significantly. After the estimation of the log absolute permeability values, the question of the effective log permeability estimation was considered carefully. Corey approximation was used in order to estimate the values of the effective permeability to oil and water at current water saturation. Finally, the comparison between the obtained continuous permeabilities and formation tester’s permeabilities was performed. In order to compare the effective permeability values estimated log permeability as well as mobilities was averaged along the drill stem testing interval. According to the obtained results the correlation had shown the usability of the developed methodology.

In conclusion it can be expected that obtained petrophysical trends can provide more exact estimation of reservoir permeability based on well logging results, core plugs as well as formation tester data. Besides, it can be said that the application of the developed workflow of the effective permeability estimation will afford the improvement of development process prediction during the simulation modeling and further field development.

Introduction
Definitions of permeability. The main purpose of the oil and gas geology is the study of internal structure of target formation, which can be characterized by different geological and physical parameters. The ability of reservoir rock to filtrate the fluid is the key parameter, which should be estimated carefully in order to perform efficient reservoir management plan. Permeability is the ability of rock to transform fluid under the applied pressure differential [1]. Permeability values can be described by absolute, effective and relative permeability. Permeability values can be obtained from several sources, which have different scale factor and measurement physics, see Fig.1, including:
	• Laboratory measurements on core samples (routine and special core analysis);
	• Wireline-Log measurements (standard logging complex and NMR-log);
	• Application of formation testers (MDT/XPT);
	• Well test interpretation results (build up and draw down tests).
 
Figure 1 Various sources of permeability measurements

Multiscale permeability integration – World experience. In order to prepare the solution to the problem of continuous permeability estimation, which will connect the different types of permeability measurements anyway, the various information sources were investigated and the existing Russian and world experience was analyzed during the careful reading of the available thesis researches and SPE papers.

Firstly, it was indicated that the problem of permeability interrelationships was raised by Usman Ahmed and Steven Crary in the SPE paper [1] in 1991. Authors have presented the logical analysis of various permeability estimation techniques. It was obtained that core, log and well-test permeabilities are influenced by three important factors: measurement scale, environment and physical principles [1]. It was estimated that correct integration of the available input information using the three important factors enhances correlation between the various techniques. Secondly, during the further investigation it was obtained that there are three main groups of methods, which can be possibly used for the estimation of continuous effective permeability from well logs, based on the available core and formation tester data. 

The first method was considered by Ahmed Al-Harbi, Alain Gringarten and Ridvan Akkurt in their SPE paper [6] in 2007. They have investigated the possibility of calibrating the static values of permeability, obtained from NMR-log, with the dynamic parameters, estimated from the formation testers.  Scientists have presented a great systematic approach, which may be helpful for calibrating the NMR-permeability on formation tester data. Besides, it was detected that the obtained continuous permeabilities match drill stem test data as satisfactory as the NMR-permeabilities, which were calibrated using core data. In addition, combination of NMR and well formation testers can provide the determination of reliable permeability values, which can be used in further field modelling. However, it should be taken into account that the performance of NMR-logging operations cannot be done in each well due to the high costs of this type of operations. Moreover, the results, obtained during the NMR-log interpretation, should be considered carefully. Incorrect definition of T2cut-off value or improper core-log calibration may lead to under- or overestimation of permeability values, which may affect further calibration with formation tester measurements.

The second method was also taken into account by several researches. For example, Fethi Elarouci and Nabil Mokrani tried to integrate the permeability values from several sources using the hydraulic flow unit method [3] in 2010. During the study, the authors have determined the porosity-permeability interrelationships based on the facies distribution. Then they have also identified the available Hydraulic Flow Units. After that the synthetic permeability curve was generated, which provided the computation of the effective flowing thickness. Then the received permeability values were compared with the drill stem test results, which were received after the interpretation of the available pressure data. It can be conducted that researches have presented good and clear algorithm for the continuous effective permeability definition by linking between Facies Units and Hydraulic Flow Units. Moreover, these results can be used for the further geological modelling since the connection between geology and filtration processes have been found. However, the classic determination of Hydraulic Flow Units may become complex in case of complicated depositional environment, where it may not be possible to distinguish between two quite similar facies zones. Besides, the application of wide ranges of equations, which will describe each Hydraulic Flow Unit, for geological as well as simulation modelling may become quite difficult to implement comparing to the classical porosity-permeability relationship.

The third method was analyzed by Khabarov Aleksey from Salym Petroleum Development Company in his Research Thesis [4] in 2010. He had prepared the method of interactive petrophysical modelling for the undersaturated oil interval, which helped to update the permeability prediction algorithm in order to receive more reliable production parameters such as water cut and productivity. During the study of the available core data the author has updated the empirical Timur equation for permeability estimation. He has classified core absolute permeability values based on the connate water saturation. Then the equation for calibration of absolute gas permeability to relative permeability to water is derived from the relative permeability curves. After that the calculation of water cut values using the relative permeability curves, approximated by Corey-function, was performed. Then the results were compared with MDT tests [4]. Author has shown quite good method for updating the absolute permeability on its field values. However, the accent was displaced to the water cut and productivity estimation due to the fact that the target oilfield was referred to the mature field type.

In addition it should be mentioned that some authors have tried to calibrate core and log permeability with formation tester data by using the non-linear regression and machine learning [5]. These methods can provide excellent results if the methodology of interpretation is clearly stated. Otherwise, the obtained results cannot be adequate since the clear interpretation algorithm have not been developed.

Input data analysis
Geological overview. Field B is situated in the northern part of the Western Siberia petroleum basin, on the south-west part of the Gydan peninsula, and is one of the largest fields containing oil and gas condensate accumulations. From the stratigraphical point of view, target interval PK1-3 of the Field B is situated in the upper part of the sandy deposits of the Pokurskaya suite – Uvatskiy horizon, Senomanian sequence. The distinctive feature of the target accumulations is the complexity of stratigraphical correlation due to the absence of the continuous reference boundaries, which can be connected with the depositional processes, which were held on the field territory. From the depositional environment point of view, it can be said that target interval was deposited under the continental to the coastal-marine depositional environment. During the core analysis, it was obtained that the target interval is represented by the river channels system. There are three cyclothems A, B and C, which were specified in the target interval PK1-3. In general, the grain size is reduced to the top of the formation, which may show the presence of sea level influence at the top of the interval. It is assumed that the deposits of cyclite C were formed under the conditions of the meandering river. Then the river system had formed the deltaic plain, where the deposits of cyclothems B were accumulated. The upper part of the interval, where the deposits of the cyclothems A are presented, was accumulated in the deltaic front part, where the tidal processes were dominant. The conceptual model of the depositional environment is presented in Fig.2.	 During the analysis of the tectonic configuration, it can be noted that Field B has the complicated tectonic configuration. Its territory is subdivided by the series of large and small-scale faults

 
Figure 2 Conceptual depositional model for the target interval PK1-3

Petrophysics. It should be mentioned that the target reservoir is represented by the unconsolidated sandy-siltstone intervals, which are deposited at a very low depth, about 800 m in absolute values. The most probable value of porosity is laid between the 25-28 and 31-37 per cent. The possible values of permeability are distributed in the 10-50 and 100-1000 mD interval, see Fig.3 . Based on the X-Ray core analysis several types of shale were specified. It can be said, that kaolinite, chlorite, smectite, illite as well as mixed clay minerals are presented in the target interval cross-section, see Fig.4. Therefore, it can be assumed that the presence of shales may control the future fluid filtration during the Field B development.
 
Figure 3 Porosity and permeability distribution

 
Figure 4 Distribution of shale composition based on X-Ray core analysis

PVT-properties. Field B can be classified as oil and gas condensate field. Wells of Field B penetrate both oil as well as oil and gas condensate deposits. It should be mentioned that the initial reservoir pressure equals bubble point pressure and varies from 7.58-8.45 MPa. This fact may lead to the quick appearance of the solution gas if the bottomhole pressure falls below the bubble point value. Reservoir temperature equals 16 ?C. According to the PVT-tests reservoir fluid is represented by oil with high viscosity (~104 cP), low sulfur as well as paraffin content. Formation water as well as gas is also presented.

Applied methodology and results of investigation 
General solution path consideration.  During the process of simultaneous analysis of the available input data and world experience, which can be used to find the solution to the stated problem, the following interpretation methodology was developed:  
1. Log interpretation. Reassessment of the absolute permeability values corrected for shaliness by application of the available correlation, obtained from the core database.
2. Creation of effective-absolute permeability correlations using the relative permeability curves with help of collected end points, which represent effective permeability to oil and water at connate water and residual oil saturation.
3. Application of Corey approximation, which will consider the geological complexity of the Field B. 
4. Estimation of the continuous log effective permeabilities to oil and water at current water saturation. Assessment of the mobility values using the PVT-data. 
5. Comparison of the estimated effective permeability and mobility values with the formation testing results. Uncertainty analysis.
6. Recommendations for further application of the developed methodology.

Reassessment of the absolute permeability values. During the searching process of the equation, which will help to estimate the absolute permeability values, the cross plot of classical porosity-permeability relationship was analyzed, see Fig. 5. As it can be seen from the plot, the values of the absolute permeability, which can be obtained for the same porosity value, are widely spread across the target interval, which is typical for the unconsolidated formations of the Field B, which are located on the shallow depth. Therefore, it was considered to derive the alternative equation, which may be helpful for the more correct estimation of the absolute permeability values.

 
Figure 5 Classical core porosity-permeability relationships

It is widely accepted, that permeability value depends not only on porosity distribution but also on the pore medium structure, which usually can be characterized by the presence of shales.  Therefore, the equation for the log permeability estimation can have the following type . The equation was derived during the analysis of the available core data. At the beginning the correlation between the total and effective porosity was estimated taking the several values of shaliness into account, see Fig. 6a. Then the effective porosity values were plotted against the absolute permeability values, estimated from core data in order to obtain the updated porosity-permeability correlation, see Fig. 6b. 

 
a)						b)
Figure 6 Cross-plots of à) total and effective porosity and b) effective porosity and absolute permeability, based on core data, for derivation of the updated porosity-permeability relationship

During the interpretation process the following values were estimated:
1. Estimation of the shaliness coefficient
Estimation of the shaliness coefficient was based on the Neutron (W) and Density log (RHOB) curves, which were available in all analyzed wells. The following algorithm was used during the estimation [6] 
 ,					 (1)
where the parameters X0, X1 è X2 were calculated according to 
 ,					 (2)
 ,					 (3)
 ,			          	 (4)
 ,	                                                                   (5)
where Wfl  - hydrogen content in mud filtrate,  ; Wma - hydrogen content in matrix,   ; Wsh - Hydrogen content in shales,  ; ?fl - mud filtrate density,  g/cm3; ?ma - matrix density,   g/cm3; ?sh - density of shales,   g/cm3
2. Assessment of total and effective porosity
First of all, the values of total porosity were estimated according to the following formula [6]
 .					 (6)
Then the values of effective porosity were estimated as
 .				 (7)
According to the obtained correlation parameter values, which are larger than 0.7, it can be estimated that the correlation between the obtained log and core shaliness values is quite close, therefore these data can be used in further interpretation.
Then the absolute permeability values were indicated as 
 .				 (8)
The cross-plot of comparison between the estimated log and core permeability is presented in Fig. 7 below. 

 
Figure 7 Core-log permeability cross plot

As can be seen from the obtained graph, the core-log permeability correlation can be considered as quite sufficient. For wells B3, B4 and B8 the volume of shales is lower compared to another wells, therefore the estimated log permeability values are smaller in certain points. However, in general the correlation can be estimated as quite sufficient and the obtained results can be used in the further calculations.

Estimation of the effective log permeability at current water saturation. After the estimation of the log absolute permeability values, the question of the effective log permeability estimation was considered carefully. It should be pointed out that the effective permeability values can be obtained from the relative permeability curves. However, the fact that sometimes core sampling depth does not match with the depth of the performed formation testing, should be taken into account. Besides, in uncored wells the comparison between the effective permeabilities, obtained from core samples, and performed formation testing operations cannot be done due to the absence of core plugs.  In order to solve the appeared problem, Corey approximation was used in order to estimate the values of the effective permeability to oil and water at current water saturation.		
 ,				 (9)
 ,				 (10)
where kabs – absolute gas permeability, mD; keffoil (Sw), keffwater (Sw) – effective permeabilities to oil and water at current water saturation; Sw, Swc, Sro - current water saturation, connate water saturation and residual oil saturation respectively, mo, mw - Corey function parameters for oil and water respectively.
Estimation of the effective permeability at connate fluid saturation. The correlations for the effective permeability estimation were obtained from the analysis of the 14 wells, where special core analysis was performed. The primary comparison results are presented in Fig. 8. For simplicity the estimated points of effective permeability to oil will be named as oil points, effective permeability to water will be named as water points.

 
Figure 8 Initial interpretation results

During the analysis of Fig.8, it was obtained that the correlation for oil points is quite sufficient. However, it can also be highlighted that water points are widely spread comparing to the oil points. Therefore, it was considered to find the reasons for such behavior. During the searching process the water points were considered for each well separately.  The possible points, that do not match the tendency, were marked, see Fig. 9. 
 
Figure 9 Points that do not match the visible tendency

During the analysis three possible reasons for tendency failure were obtained. 
1. Experimental conditions do not match PVT properties. This fact was observed for the relative permeability curves, which were obtained from core plugs of wells B55 and B65. The applied pore pressure was equal to 7 MPa while the reservoir pressure (according to the PVT-properties) ranges from 7.58 to 8.45 MPa. Therefore the mentioned points were not considered further.
2. Changes in wettability type. The effect was defined during the analysis of the results of wettability measurements, which contained the integral wettability parameter M, which represents the ratio of spontaneously displaced kerosene volume to the whole kerosene volume and was obtained by Amott method [6]. According to the btained results, well B4 has the intermediate wettability type. Therefore, points from well B4 also were not considered during the further interpretation.
3.  The volume of small pores. The number of small pores can play a significant role during the estimation of the relative permeability to water in case of water-wet reservoir since the water will flow through the small pores. The reduction of the volume of small pores may lead to the lower values of relative permeability to water.
The above mentioned effect was observed in wells B1, B2 and B3, where, according to the porometry measurements, the volume of pores with the radius lower than 0.12 ?m was smaller comparing to other wells. 
Therefore, the above mentioned points were taken off from the further analysis. Final correlation equations are presented below and in Fig. 10. The correlation for the equations is sufficient

 ,						 (11)
 .					 (12)

 
Figure 10 Final correlation equations

Estimation of Corey coefficients. The estimation of Corey coefficients was based on the analysis of the relative permeability curves, which were previously normalized. Then the relative permeability curves were subdivided according to the geological criteria. Three groups of curves, which were connected to the specified cyclothems A, B and C, were obtained, see Fig. 12.
Each group of points was approximated by Corey function with the corresponding Corey parameters. The results of approximation can be seen on Fig. 11 and in Table 1. 
 
Figure 11 Corey functions for cyclothems A, B and C

Table 1 Parameters of Corey functions for cyclothems
Cyclothem	À	Â	Ñ
Parameter	mo	mw	mo	mw	mo	mw
Value	2.1	5.5	3	5	2.3	6

Assessment of residual oil and connate water saturation. The estimation of connate water saturation was based on the following equation 
 					 (13)
According to the comparison data it was obtained, that the correlation between estimated log and core connate water saturation values is sufficient. Therefore, the estimated results can be used during the further interpretation. The values of residual oil saturation were considered during the analysis of the available displacement efficiency surveys. Due to the fact, that the connection between the residual oil saturation and porosity or permeability was not obtained, it was proposed to analyze the distribution of the residual oil saturation values in order to choose the constant residual oil saturation value.
According to the obtained distribution the most possible values of the residual oil saturation are met in the interval of 35-36%. Therefore, the value of 35.5% was considered during further calculations.

Assessment of the continuous effective permeability from log curves. The assessment of the continuous log effective permeabilities at current water saturation was performed according to the equations (9)-(10). Moreover the mobility values were estimated taken into account the reservoir fluid viscosities [6] The results of interpretation, which was held following the above mentioned steps, is presented on the graphical plot, presented on Fig. 12. 

 
Figure 12 Example plot for well B1

Comparison with formation testing data. It should be mentioned that the target formation was tested by dint of Schlumberger Modular Dynamic Tester Assembly, which had contained the pretest and mini-DST module [7], which benefits were described in the previous section of the current individual project report. Besides it should be mentioned that the radius of investigation for mini-DST module with Dual Packer assembly is larger comparing to the single probe pretest module. Moreover the Dual Packer module isolates the interval while pretest module connects to the borehole. Therefore, it can be concluded that the values of permeability, which are determined from these tests are quite different. 

During the analysis of the available formation tester data it was obtained that there were 5 to 6 points of prolonged mini-DST testing in each well, during which the fluid type, permeability and mobility values as well as water curt and radius of investigation were obtained. In addition, 20 to 30 points of pretest investigation, during which the values of pressure gradient, mobility, volume of sampling fluid etc., were provided for further analysis. The question was how to use the available information very thoughtfully in order to validate the developed methodology of continuous log permeability estimation.

Comparison of effective log and mini-DST permeability. During the comparison of the effective log and formation tester’s permeability the following considerations were taken into account:
1. The number of available points, where the permeability value was estimated, was rather small. Most points were obtained from the places, where the reservoir oil was sampled. Samples of 100 % water were not considered since they were taken in the beginning of the oil-water zone, where some volume of oil should be observed in the water probe. Besides, for some probes it was estimated, that water sample contained both formation water and mud filtrate, which may lead to the increasing values of mobility. Therefore, the comparison of effective permeabilities was done mostly in the oil zone.
2. It should be mentioned that the radius of investigation for logs and mini-DST is not similar. For Neutron and Density logs, which were used during the reassessment of the log permeability values, the radius of investigation usually equals 35-50 cm [17] while mini-DST can investigate 20-50 m of reservoir formation [7]. Therefore it can be expected that the effective permeability values may not be similar.
3. In order to compare the effective permeability values estimated log permeability was averaged along the drill stem testing interval, which equals 1.6 m for Dual Packer Module.
The results of the comparison are presented in Fig. 13. According to the obtained results the correlation between the points is quite sufficient. However, it should be mentioned that more points for the workflow validation are required. It will be very useful to reassess the effective permeability to water from the formation testing data in order to compare it with the estimated log effective permeability to water.

 
Figure 13 Averaged effective log permeability-permeability DST plot

Comparison between log and mini-DST mobility. According to the analysis of the available input data it was obtained that some points from mini-DST testing did not have the values of the obtained permeability. Therefore it was proposed to compare the values of log and mini-DST mobilities. Log mobility was also averaged along the investigation interval. The results of comparison are presented in Fig. 14.
 
Figure 15 Averaged log mobility-mobility DST plot

According to the obtained results, it can be viewed that the correlation between log and mini-DST mobilities in oil zone is quite sufficient. However, if the additional fluid, for example formation water or gas, is flowing to the probe chamber, the mini-DST mobility increases due to the significant difference in fluid viscosities. It also should be mentioned that water points do not follow the tendency since the probes may contain the volume of mud filtrate.

Comparison between log and pretest mobility. Before the beginning of mobility comparison, it should be mentioned that the values of drawdown pretest permeability were not obtained from the estimated pretest mobility values since the type of flowing fluid as well as its viscosity was not known. Therefore, the mobility values were compared. In order to perform an adequate comparison with the estimated log mobility, the values of pretest mobility to mud filtrate were calibrated on the available mini-DST mobility to formation fluid since the filtration process of both mud filtrate and reservoir fluid is held through the same porous media. In order to calibrate the pretest mobility the following equation (16) was obtained.

 .						(16)
The results of comparison between the recalculated pretest mobility and log mobility, which can be done directly due to the pretty similar radius of investigation, are presented in Fig. 15. According to the obtained results the correlation between pretest and log mobility values can be estimated as quite sufficient, which also validates the developed methodology.

 
Figure 15 Log-pretest mobility plot

Discussion of the obtained results. During the problem study the methodology influencing factors were highlighted and uncertainty analysis was performed. During the uncertainty analysis the values of Corey coefficients as well as residual oil and current water saturation were varied in interval of ±15% in order to analyze their influence on the estimated effective permeability values. From the obtained spider diagrams it was indicated that the value of current water saturation has a significant influence on the estimated values of the continuous log effective permeabilities since for the water-wet reservoir the higher value of current water saturation leads to the easier filtration of the increasing volume of formation water. In order to reduce the above mentioned uncertainty in earlier estimated current water saturation (the values were provided in the log interpretation base) the parameters of Archie equation, which were taken for the interpretation should be reviewed carefully.

The values of residual oil saturation as well as Corey coefficients have the smaller influence on the estimated effective permeabilities. It should also be mentioned that for the subsequent mobility estimation the value of viscosity may have a significant effect on the obtained mobility values in case of the fields, containing high viscosity oil since high oil viscosity reduces the mobility value significantly. Therefore, the viscosity value should be considered during the formation testing interpretation very thoughtfully.

In general it can be observed that the developed methodology of the continuous log effective permeability estimation can provide sufficient results after its application. The obtained correlations and principles, which were incorporated into the Python scripts (program codes) for Techlog 2012.1, can be used in further petrophysical interpretation and simulation modelling.

Conclusion and suggestions for further work
Summarizing the results of the performed investigation it can be mentioned that for the target interval of the Field B the following results were obtained:
1. The developed workflow provided the estimation of the continuous log effective permeability and subsequent mobility values. The estimated values have shown sufficient correlation with the formation tester’s permeability.
2. As a consequence the prediction of the effective permeability values became more reliable. This fact may provide better prediction of the development process for the analyzed field during the simulation modelling as well as the subsequent production process.
3. The created computer algorithms will be used during the log interpretation and subsequent simulation modelling on the analogues fields.

For the subsequent work it will suggested to perform the interpretation of the NMR-log, which may be advised  to perform on the Field B territory, in order to obtain the absolute permeability curve in uncored wells. This will help to validate the updated porosity-permeability relationship corrected for shaliness since both models indicate the shale volume.
Besides, the pretest reinterpretation is planned to be performed in order to obtain the drawdown permeability values. In this case the viscosity of the flowing fluid should be determined exactly. Finally, the validation of the developed interpretation technique should be performed on the another oil or gas fields.
 BREAKS HERE
In thå fiålds thàt àrå in màturå stàgå îf dåvålîðmånt ànd àrå îðåràtåd fîr à suffiñiåntly lîng ðåriîd îf timå, thå issuå îf thå dåvålîðmånt îf thåir råsiduàl råsårvås, diråñtly rålàtåd tî thå àñhiåvåmånt îf thå dåsign Råñîvåry Fàñtîr, is ðàràmîunt. Thus, ðrîðårly sålåñtåd tåñhnîlîgy, whiñh àllîws inñråàsing îil råñîvåry, is ñruñiàl tî thå dåvålîðmånt îf suñh fiålds. Thå lîng-tårm ðràñtiñå îf àððlying hydràuliñ fràñturing în hîrizîntàl wålls in thå fiålds îf Wåstårn Sibårià hàs shîwn thàt ñurråntly it is thå înly tåñhnîlîgy thàt àllîws invîlving ðråviîusly undràinåd zînås in thå dåvålîðmånt ànd åffåñtivå dåvålîðing råsiduàl råsårvås îf fiålds thàt àrå in màturå stàgås îf dåvålîðmånt. Ðàrtiñulàrly, Fiåld X ñàn bå àn åxàmðlå. Às à ðàrt îf thå åxðårimåntàl-industriàl råsåàrñh ðrîgràm in Fiåld X, MSHF (Multistàgå hydràuliñ fràñturing) on thå hîrizîntàl sidåtràñks frîm thå ðrîduñtiîn wålls with à suffiñiåntly làrgå àññumulàtåd ðrîduñtiîn wàs àððliåd. Bàsåd în thå råsults îf this tåñhnîlîgy àððliñàtiîn, sîmå wålls wårå idåntifiåd with àñhiåvåmånt fàilurå îf ñàlñulàtåd liquid ràtå. In this paper ànàlysis of thå ðîssiblå råàsîns fîr àñhiåvåmånt fàilurå thå ðlànnåd ðàràmåtårs ànd thå subsåquånt dåvålîðmånt îf thå ñruñiàl ñritårià àllîwing tî sålåñt ðîtåntiàl rågiîns, whårå àððliñàtiîn îf MSHF will bå mîst åffiñiånt was performed.
Introduction
Thå hydràuliñ fràñturing în thå hîrizîntàl wålls àññîrding tî thå fiålds îf Wåst Sibåriàn ðåtrîlåum ðrîvinñå àllîwåd tî åxtånd thå limits îf àððliñàbility îf hîrizîntàl wålls ànd, in ðàrtiñulàr, hîrizîntàl sidåtràñks. Hîrizîntàl sidåtràñking àllîws tî ðrîduñå råsiduàl råsårvås in thå àråàs whårå thå ðrådîminànt ðàrt îf thå råsårvås hàs àlråàdy båån ðrîduñåd by thå “mîthår” wållbîrå. Thå åxðåriånñå îf drilling hîrizîntàl wålls in thå fiålds îf Wåstårn Sibårià shîws thàt in mîst ñàsås thå àñtuàl îil ðrîduñtiîn ràtå is lîwår thàn thåîråtiñàlly ðîssiblå. This fàñt båñîmås thå bàsis fîr thå intrîduñtiîn îf thå multistàgå hydràuliñ fràñturing (MSHF) tåñhnîlîgy. Àððliñàtiîn îf MSHF în thå hîrizîntàl wålls àllîws tî ñråàtå à hydrîdynàmiñ ñînnåñtiîn båtwåån àll làyårs îf thå ðrîduñtivå fîrmàtiîn ànd tî råduñå skin-fàñtîr thàt îññurs during drilling, ànd thåråby ðrîvidå mîrå åffiñiånt dràinàgå îf thå zînå àdjàñånt tî thå hîrizîntàl wållbîrå. Hîwåvår, usàgå îf this tåñhnîlîgy låàd tî à numbår îf ðrîblåms ñînnåñtåd with unåxðåñtåd råduñåd îil ràtås thàt dî nît ñînstitutå tî thå ðlànnåd înås. Thå first îbviîus råàsîn suggåståd îf unðlànnåd îil ràtå lîssås wàs àssîñiàtåd with fràñturå bråàkthrîugh intî thå nîn-tàrgåt ànd wàtår-båàring intårvàl thàt wàs ðråviîusly dåðlåtåd. Thå îthår ðîssiblå råàsîns àrå suggåståd tî bå thå ðrîblåms àssîñiàtåd with tåñhnîlîgy ànd dåsign îf thå hydràuliñ fràñturing ànd, fîr instànñå, sðåñifiñ fåàturås îf thå tàrgåt fîrmàtiîn gåîlîgy. In àdditiîn, it shîuld bå nîtåd thàt whilå drilling îf hîrizîntàl wålls, drilling mud is lîngår in ñîntàñt with à ðrîduñtivå fîrmàtiîn, whiñh signifiñàntly inñråàsås skin-fàñtîr tî ðîsitivå vàluå, thàt ðråvånts fluid dràinàgå intî thå wållbîrå. Àññîrding tî thå råsults îf this tåñhnîlîgy àððliñàtiîn în Fiåld X, înly à smàll numbår îf wålls ñàn bå ñlàssifiåd às suññåssful ðrîduñing àt flîw ràtås ñîmðàràblå tî thå ðrådiñtåd înås. Thus, thå fîllîwing tàsks àrå ðlànnåd: 
1) Ànàlytiñàl àssåssmånt îf ðîssibility îf MSHF àððliñàtiîn în thå hîrizîntàl sidåtràñks îf Fiåld X.
2) Thå ànàlysis îf thå îbtàinåd råsults. Idåntifiñàtiîn ànd ànàlysis îf ðîssiblå råàsîns ñînnåñtåd with ñàlñulàtåd ràtå àñhiåvåmånt fàilurå.
3) Dåvålîðmånt îf thå crusial ñritårià àllîwing tî sålåñt ðîtåntiàl rågiîns, whårå àððliñàtiîn îf MSHF will bå mîst åffiñiånt.
4) Ñîmðàràtivå àssåssmånt îf åñînîmiñ åffiñiånñy båtwåån thå hîrizîntàl sidåtràñks with MSHF ànd àððliñàtiîn îf hîrizîntàl infill drilling.
Ðårfîrmànñå îf thå tàsks will àllîw tî àñhiåvå thå ðrîjåñt îbjåñtivå, whiñh is dåvålîðmånt îf thå sålåñtiîn ñritårià sårvåd tî ñhîîså thå àððrîðriàtå àråàs whårå MSHF will bå mîst åffiñiånt.

Fild X description

Fiåld X is lîñàtåd in Wåstårn Sibårià tî bå åxàñt in Tîmsk ànd Tyumån rågiîns. Fiåld X wàs disñîvåråd in 1962. It wàs ñîmmånñåd tî bå ðrîduñåd in 1966. Thå gåîlîgiñàl ñrîss-såñtiîn îf thå fiåld is råðråsåntåd by dåðîsits îf thå Ðàlåîzîiñ, Juràssiñ, Ñråtàñåîus, Ðàlåîgånå ànd Quàtårnàry åràs. Thå Måsîzîiñ-Ñånîzîiñ sådimåntàry ñîvår with stràtigràðhiñ unñînfîrmity îvårlàys thå dislîñàtåd dåðîsits îf thå Ðàlåîzîiñ bàsåmånt. Thå ñîmmårñiàl îil ànd gàs ðîtåntiàl is invåstigàtåd in 18 ðrîduñtivå fîrmàtiîns ñîmðîsåd îf Ñråtàñåîus ànd Juràssiñ dåðîsits ànd ånñîuntåråd in thå wåàthåring ñrust. Thå bulk vîlumå îf thå Stîñk Tànk Îil Initiàl in Ðlàñå (STÎIIÐ) is in Ñråtàñåîus dåðîsits (in ðrîduñtivå fîrmàtiîns ÀB1 ànd BV8). Ðrîduñtivå fîrmàtiîn ÀB1 wàs ðånåtràtåd by wålls drillåd în Fiåld X àt dåðths 1645 - 1722 m. 
Àññîrding tî thå gåîlîgy, dåðîsits îf Fiåld X àrå ñîmðlåx, duå tî thå multi-làyåråd ànd màñrî-håtårîgånåîus struñturå îf thå ðrîduñtivå làyårs, ñîmðliñàtåd by thå ñhàràñtår îf thå struñturàl ðlàn ñhàràñtårizåd with à lît îf ålåvàting ànd trîughs, zînås îf tåñtîniñ fàulting (dåstruñtiîn) ànd råðlàñåmånt îf ðrîduñtivå fîrmàtiîn by imðårmåàblå rîñks. 
À distinñtivå gåîlîgiñàl fåàturå îf thå tàrgåt fîrmàtiîn ÀB1 is thå ðråsånñå îf inñråàsåd shàlinåss ànd sðåñifiñ struñturàl fingårðrints in thå uððår ðàrt îf thå fîrmàtiîn, thàt is ñhàràñtårizåd with intånsivå biîturbàtiîn, whiñh ñàusås inñråàsåd dågråå îf håtårîgånåity in thå ðrîduñtivå ðàrt îf thå råsårvîir ànd inåffiñiånt îil råñîvåry. Àlsî, it shîuld bå nîtåd thàt thå distinñtivå fåàturå îf thå råsårvîir is thàt its lîwår ànd uððår ðàrts àrå ñhàràñtårizåd by diffårånt råsårvîir ðrîðårtiås. Thus, thå lîwår ðàrt is ñhàràñtårizåd by à highår ðårmåàbility (uð tî 4 - 4.5 mD), whåråàs thå uððår ðàrt hàs ðîîr råsårvîir ðrîðårtiås. Fîrmàtiîn ÀB1 is thå tàrgåt ànd ñîntàins thå gråàtåst àmîunt îf initiàl råñîvåràblå îil råsårvås. Thå dågråå îf ñîmðlåxity îf thå gåîlîgiñàl struñturå àllîwåd tî àttributå thå îil råsårvås tî hàrd-tî-råñîvår îil.

Råàsîns fîr àððliñàtiîn îf MSHF in thå hîrizîntàl sidåtràñks îf Fiåld X ànd råsults îf thå àððliñàtiîn

Exðåriånñå îf MSHF în hîrizîntàl wålls în thå fiålds îf Wåstårn Sibårià hàs shîwn thàt ñurråntly it is thå înly tåñhnîlîgy thàt àllîws invîlving ðråviîusly undràinåd zînås in thå dåvålîðmånt ànd åffåñtivå dåvålîðing råsiduàl råsårvås îf fiålds thàt àrå in màturå stàgås îf dåvålîðmånt. Ðàrtiñulàrly, Fiåld X ñàn ñînsidår às àn åxàmðlå îf suñh fiåld. Às à ðàrt îf thå åxðårimåntàl-industriàl råsåàrñh ðrîgràm în Fiåld X, MSHF in thå hîrizîntàl sidåtràñks frîm thå ðrîduñtiîn wålls with à suffiñiåntly làrgå àññumulàtåd ðrîduñtiîn wàs àððliåd tî îðtimizå thå dràinàgå zînås îf thåså wålls ànd invîlvå in thå dåvålîðmånt îf ðråviîusly undràinåd àråàs. It shîuld bå nîtåd thàt sidåtràñking wàs ñînsidåråd às à tyðå îf wîrkîvår ðrîgràms àððliåd tî wålls with lîw flîw ràtås, ànd it àllîws råduñing thå ñîst ñîmðàråd tî thå ñîst whiñh is nåñåssàry tî drilling à nåw wåll. Àlsî, it is nåñåssàry tî ñînsidår thå drilling ðrîblåms ñàusåd by thå ðråsånñå îf thå Kîshàiskàyà måmbår swålling ñlàys in thå gåîlîgiñàl såñtiîn. Håàvy mud is nåñåssàry tî ðråvånt swålling îf thåså ñlàys, ànd thå subsåquånt stàñking îf thå drill string. Lîngår intåràñtiîn îf håàvy mud with ðrîduñtivå råsårvîir ñàusås ñîlmàtàtiîn îf nåàr wållbîrå àråà îf hîrizîntàl ðàrt ànd, thåråfîrå, high ðîsitivå skin-fàñtîr. Àððliñàtiîn îf MSHF àllîws tî råmîvå this skin-fàñtîr. Às it is knîwn frîm thå tåñhnîlîgy îf MSHF, thå långth îf thå hîrizîntàl ðàrt limits thå ðårmissiblå numbår îf fràñturing stàgås, whiñh ñàn bå àððliåd în hîrizîntàl ðàrt îf thå wåll. Bàsåd în thå åxðåriånñå îf MSHF în thå Fiåld-ànàlîg, 3-stàgå MSHF în thå hîrizîntàl sidåtràñks with lîw ðrîððànt lîàd (frîm 3 tî 5 tîns) ðår înå stàgå wàs àððliåd în thå wåll-ñàndidàtås îf Fiåld X. Thå åñînîmiñàlly fåàsiblå långth îf thå hîrizîntàl ðàrt wàs 250-320 måtårs. Àn ànàlysis îf thå 1873 wålls îf Fiåld X bàsåd în thå fîllîwing sålåñtiîn ñritårià (Qîil < 4 tîn/dày ànd Wàtår ñut > 80%) màkås it ðîssiblå tî idåntify 301 ðîssiblå wåll-ñàndidàtås whårå MSHF tåñhnîlîgy ñàn bå àððliåd. Às àlråàdy måntiînåd, às ðàrt îf thå åxðårimåntàl-industriàl råsåàrñh ðrîgràm în Fiåld X, 13 hîrizîntàl sidåtràñks with MSHF wårå àððliåd ànd 2 infill hîrizîntàl wålls with MSHF wårå drillåd. Bàsåd în thå råsults îf thå àððliñàtiîn îf MSHF în thå hîrizîntàl sidåtràñks ànd infill drillåd hîrizîntàl wålls, sîmå wålls wårå idåntifiåd with àñhiåvåmånt fàilurå îf ñàlñulàtåd liquid ràtå. Sîmå îf thåm wårå àlsî idåntifiåd às "unsuññåssful" wålls duå tî bråàkthrîugh îf thå fràñturå intî thå undårlying wàtår-båàring fîrmàtiîn ànd ñhàràñtårizåd by à high initiàl wàtår ñut. À ñîmðàrisîn îf ðrådiñtåd ànd àñtuàlly råñåivåd ðàràmåtårs is ðråsåntåd in Tàblå 1.
Tàblå 1 - Ñîmðàrisîn îf ðrådiñtåd ànd råñåivåd ðàràmåtårs îf thå hîrizîntàl sidåtràñks ànd infill drillåd wålls with MSHF
 
Thus, wålls wårå idåntifiåd with àñhiåvåmånt fàilurå îf ñàlñulàtåd liquid ràtå. Thåså wålls will bå thå îbjåñts fîr furthår ànàlysis. Firstly, thå wålls with thå bråàkthrîugh îf thå hydràuliñ fràñturå in thå undårlying wàtår-båàring fîrmàtiîn ÀB12b wårå ànàlyzåd. Bàsåd în thå råsults îf thå ànàlysis, it ñàn bå ñînñludåd thàt thå màin gåîlîgiñàl råàsîns àrå: làtåràl disñîntinuity ànd fråquånt undårbidding îf làyårs, às wåll às à smàll thiñknåss îf thå imðårmåàblå intårlàyår båtwåån thå fîrmàtiîns ÀB11 ànd ÀB12b. Thå màin råàsîns ñînnåñtåd with thå dåsign îf thå hydràuliñ fràñturing inñludå à high vîlumå îf ðrîððànt lîàding ðår înå stàgå (uð tî 21 tîns), às wåll às à high injåñtiîn ràtå îf fràñturing fluid (uð tî 2.6 m3/min). It shîuld bå nîtåd thàt în thå first wålls (Wålls X1, X2, X3 ànd X4) high-tînnàgå MSHF with à high fràñturå fluid injåñtiîn ràtå wàs àððliåd. In tårms îf thå bråàkthrîugh îf thå hydràuliñ fràñturå intî thå undårlying wàtår-båàring fîrmàtiîn ÀB12b, thå fràñturå dåsign wàs ñhàngåd fîr thå råmàining wålls, în whiñh MSHF wàs ðlànnåd.
Àlsî, suññåssful wålls wårå ànàlyzåd. Åxñåss îf thå åxðåñtåd ðrîduñtiîn ràtå frîm thåså wålls is duå tî thå ðånåtràtiîn by thå hîrizîntàl ðàrt îf zînås with à ðårmåàbility thàt åxñååds thå åxðåñtåd înå (àññåðtåd by thå gåîlîgiñàl mîdål), ñhàràñtårizåd by làrgå îil-sàturàtåd thiñknåssås ànd lîñàtåd in thå zînå îf gråàtår thiñknåssås îf àn imðånåtràblå intårlàyår båtwåån làyårs ÀB11 ànd ÀB12b. Thå àbsånñå îf fràñturå bråàkthrîugh in thå undårlying wàtår-båàring fîrmàtiîn is àñhiåvåd by dåñråàsing thå ðrîððànt lîàding ðår înå stàgå uð tî 3 tîns ànd dåñråàsing thå injåñtiîn ràtå îf fràñturing fluid uð tî 2.0 m3/min.

Ànàlysis îf thå råàsîns ñînnåñtåd with àñhiåvåmånt fàilurå îf ðlànnåd ðàràmåtårs

Thå ànàlysis îf thå råàsîns ñînnåñtåd with àñhiåvåmånt fàilurå îf ñàlñulàtåd ràtå wàs stàrtåd with à thåîråtiñàl åstimàtiîn îf thå flîw ràtå îf thå wålls with hîrizîntàl sidåtràñks ànd MSHF. Bàsåd în thå råviåw îf thå litåràturå, måthîdîlîgy îf Hujun Li, Zhångqi Jià ànd Zhàîshång Wåi [1] is thå mîst àððrîðriàtå ànd àvàilàblå in using ànd giving thå liquid flîw ràtås ñlîså tî thå àñtuàlly îbtàinåd înås. It shîuld bå nîtåd thàt this tåñhniquå wàs àdîðtåd in thå måthîdîlîgiñàl guidålinås îf thå Ñîmðàny [2] dåvålîðing this Fiåld. Thå ðàràmåtårs ñhàràñtårizing fràñturås ànd råquiråd fîr using in this tåñhniquå wårå tàkån frîm thå råðîrts îf thå fràñturing ðårfîrmåd fîr åàñh wåll. 
Thus, thå liquid flîw ràtå wàs ñàlñulàtåd fîr åàñh stàgå îf thå fràñturing. Thå tîtàl liquid flîw ràtå wàs îbtàinåd by summing thå ðrîduñtiîn ràtås îbtàinåd frîm åàñh fràñturå såðàràtåly. In îrdår tî ñîmðàrå thå ñàlñulàtåd ànd àñtuàl ðrîduñtiîn ràtås mîrå ðrîðårly, Mînthly ðrîduñtiîn råðîrts îf thå wålls wårå usåd tî ñàlñulàtå thå àvåràgå ðrîduñtiîn ràtå with whiñh thå wålls ðrîduñåd. Thus, thåîråtiñàlly ñàlñulàtåd ðrîduñtiîn ràtås fîr wålls withîut fràñturå bråàkthrîugh àññîrding tî thå måthîdîlîgy [1] wårå ñîmðàråd with thå àvåràgå mînthly liquid flîw ràtås îf thå wålls ànd àrå ðråsåntåd in thå fîrm îf à diàgràm in Figurå 1.

















Figurå 1. Ràtås ñîmðàrisîn

Bàsåd în thå råsults îf thå ñîmðàrisîn ñàlñulàtåd Qliquid ànd Qliquid àvåràgå frîm Mînthly ðrîduñtiîn råðîrt, wåll X8 wàs idåntifiåd às wåll whiñh thå mînthly àvåràgå flîw ràtå åxñååds thå ñàlñulàtåd înå (thå diffårånñå in ðrîduñtiîn ràtås is within thå stàtistiñàl årrîr ànd mày bå duå tî nîn-ñînfirmàtiîn îf thå initiàlly àssumåd ðårmåàbility vàluås îr nåt ðày thiñknåssås). Wålls wårå àlsî idåntifiåd with à ñlåàr diffårånñå in thå ñàlñulàtåd ànd àvåràgå mînthly ðrîduñtiîn ràtås. Wåll ðårfîrmànñå îf thåså wålls wårå àññåðtåd fîr furthår ànàlysis in îrdår tî idåntify ðîssiblå råàsîns fîr thå dåsign ànd quàlity îf hydràuliñ fràñturås, whiñh ñîuld hàvå àn imðàñt în thå quàlity îf thå fluid flîw thrîugh fràñturås.

Wåll ðårfîrmànñå ànàlysis

Wåll ðårfîrmànñå ànàlysis wàs bàsåd în ðàràmåtårs frîm bringing thå wåll tî stàblå ðrîduñtiîn ànd wåll ðårfîrmànñå frîm sðåñiàlizåd ðrîgràm ÎNIKS-Ñhåss.  Thåså ðàràmåtårs inñludå suñh ðàràmåtårs às liquid dynàmiñ låvål (m), liquid ràtå (m3/dày), wàtår ñut (%), ðumð intàkå ðråssurå (àtm), îutsidå tubing ðråssurå (àtm) ànd ðumð såtting dåðth (m), ñhàràñtårizing thå wåll îðåràting during thå ðåriîd îf its ðrîduñtiîn. In tårms îf thå fàñt thàt in this ñàså it is nåñåssàry tî dåàl with åàrly trànsiånt flîw rågimå îf thå wåll ànd vàriàblå ràtås, à limitàtiîn îf thå àððliñàbility îf ñlàssiñàl wåll tåst ànàlysis måthîds fîr ànàlyzing thåså dàtà is råvåàlåd. In this ðrîjåñt, à tåñhniquå dåvålîðåd by Ð. Liàng, J.M. Thîmðsîn ànd L. Màttàr [3], whiñh wàs dåsñribåd åàrliår in thå litåràturå råviåw såñtiîn wàs îbsårvåd.Råðråsåntàtivå wåll ðårfîrmànñå dàtà, fîr whiñh wåll ðårfîrmànñå ànàlysis ñîuld bå ðårfîrmåd, wårå înly àvàilàblå fîr wålls X1, X2, X9, X10 ànd X14.
Wåll ðårfîrmànñå dàtà fîr åàñh wåll wàs ðråðàråd with thå subsåquånt ñînstruñtiîn îf à diàgnîstiñ lîg-lîg ðlît fîr thå ðurðîså idåntifiñàtiîn îf fingårðrints ñîrråsðînd tî fluid flîw rågimås àt diffårånt timå ðåriîds îf wåll ðrîduñtiîn.
Wåll X9 ðårfîrmànñå ànàlysis
Diàgnîstiñ ðlît ÐI vs. t_màt_bàl (Figurå 2)
This lîg-lîg ðlît màkås it ðîssiblå tî idåntify thå ðråsånñå îf àll fluid flîw rågimås: thå åxistånñå îf à linåàr (åàrly-timå) flîw tî fràñturås, à ràdiàl flîw rågimå tî à hîrizîntàl ðàrt îf à wåll, ànd à linåàr (làtå-timå) flîw.
Såmilig ðlît dÐ vs. vt_màt_bàl (Figurå 2)
This ðlît råðråsånts à hàlf slîðå îf linåàr flîw in Åàrly timå ðåriîd, ñhàràñtårizing infinitå ñînduñtivity fràñturå.
Ñàrtåsiàn ðlît 1/q vs. vt_màt_bàl (Figurå 2)
Åstimàtiîn îf thå fràñturå quàlity (dåtårminàtiîn îf thå åxistånñå îf à ðîsitivå skin-fàñtîr) wàs ñàrriåd îut using thå tåñhniquå dåvålîðåd by R.Î. Bållî ànd R.À. Wàttånbàrgår [4], whiñh wàs dåsñribåd åàrliår in thå litåràturå råviåw såñtiîn.
À diàgnîstiñ ðlît (figurå 2) wàs ñînstruñtåd ànd às à råsult it ñàn bå sàid thàt thå vàluå îf thå skin-fàñtîr îf this wåll is någligiblå.


Figurå 2. Diadnostic plots

Fîr Wåll X10, à similàr båhàviîr îf fluid flîw rågimås wàs îbtàinåd (diàgnîstiñ ðlîts àrå ðråsåntåd in Àððåndix 1).
Thån, wålls wårå ànàlyzåd in whiñh à fràñturå bråàkthrîugh wàs îbtàinåd. Thåså àrå wålls X1, X14 ànd X2. 
Wåll X1 ðårfîrmànñå ànàlysis
Diàgnîstiñ ðlît ÐI vs. t_màt_bàl (Àððåndix 2) 
This lîg-lîg ðlît àllîwåd tî idåntify thå ðråsånñå îf înly twî flîw rågimås: linåàr (åàrly-timå) flîw tî fràñturås ànd linåàr (làtå-timå) flîw rågimå. Thå àbsånñå îf àn åxðliñit ràdiàl rågimå in thå ðlît ñàn bå åxðlàinåd by thå åàrly wàtår bråàkthrîugh îf wàtår tî thå wållbîrå.
Såmilig ðlît dÐ vs. vt_màt_bàl (Àððåndix 2)
In this ðlît, hàlf slîðå is åvidånt, whiñh àllîws tî ñînñludå thàt thårå is à fluid flîw tî thå hydràuliñ fràñturås.
Ñàrtåsiàn ðlît 1/q vs. vt_màt_bàl (Àððåndix 2)
Ànàlysis îf this ðlît shîwåd thàt thå sðîts hàvå thå båhàviîr similàr às fràñturå bråàkthrîugh.
Wåll X14 ðårfîrmànñå ànàlysis
Diàgnîstiñ ðlît ÐI vs. t_màt_bàl (Àððåndix 3) 
This ðlît màkås it ðîssiblå tî idåntify thå åxistånñå îf àll thråå rågimås îf fluid flîw tî thå wåll (à linåàr (åàrly-timå) flîw tî fràñturås, à ràdiàl flîw rågimå tî à hîrizîntàl ðàrt îf à wåll, ànd à linåàr (làtå-timå) flîw).
Såmilig ðlît dÐ vs. vt_màt_bàl (Àððåndix 3)
Àt this ðlît slîðå hàs à smàllår slîðå thàn thå hàlf înå, în thå bàsis îf whiñh it ñàn bå àssumåd thàt ðàrtiàl ñîlmàtàtiîn îf hydràuliñ fràñturås tàkås ðlàñå.
Ñàrtåsiàn ðlît 1/q vs. vt_màt_bàl (Àððåndix 3)
In this ðlît, dàtà båhàviîr is similàr tî thàt fîr wåll X2, thå ñhàràñtår îf thå dàtà is idåntiñàl tî thàt înå whiñh ñhàràñtårizås thå fràñturå bråàkthrîugh.
Wåll X2 ðårfîrmànñå ànàlysis  
Diàgnîstiñ ðlît ÐI vs. t_màt_bàl (Àððåndix 4) 
In this ðlît thårå is virtuàlly nî åàrly-timå linåàr flîw rågimå, thå rådiàl rågimå is ðîîrly dåvålîðåd; hîwåvår, thå linåàr (làtå-timå) rågimå is ñlåàrly åxðråssåd.
Såmilig ðlît dÐ vs. vt_màt_bàl (Àððåndix 4)
In this ðlît hàlf slîðå is idåntifiåd àt làtå timås îf wåll ðrîduñtiîn, whiñh ñàn bå intårðråtåd às thå åffåñt îf thå bîundàry influånñå. This wåll is ñlîså tî såvåràl injåñtiîn wålls ànd this båhàviîr ñàn bå åxðlàinåd by thå imðàñt îf thåså wålls by ñråàting à ñînstànt ðråssurå bîundàry fîrmåd by wàtår injåñting intî thå fîrmàtiîn.
Ñàrtåsiàn ðlît 1/q vs. vt_màt_bàl (Àððåndix 4)
In this ðlît, båhàviîr wàs idåntifiåd, whiñh ñhàràñtårizås fràñturå bråàkthrîugh. 
Ñhàràñtåristiñ fåàturås îf thåså rågimås îf inflîw in thå ñînstruñtåd diàgnîstiñ ðlîts àllîwåd tî ñînñludå thå fîllîwing: hydràuliñ fràñturås àrå ñlåàn (fràñturå gål is dåstrîyåd), thå ðîsitivå skin-fàñtîr àððåàring duå tî dåstruñtiîn ànd ñîlmàtàtiîn îf thå fràñturå is àbsånt.
Thå ðånåtràtiîn ñhàràñtår by thå sidåtràñks thrîugh ðrîduñtivå fîrmàtiîn ÀB11 wàs àlsî ànàlyzåd (Àððåndix 5). Thå dàtà îf wåll ðånåtràtiîn in thå ðrîduñtivå ðàrt wårå tàkån frîm thå Finàl råðîrt îf drilling ðrîñåss gåîlîgiñàl mînitîring îf thå wålls. Thå råsults îf thå ànàlysis shîw thàt thå hîrizîntàl sidåtràñks wårå drillåd màinly in thå uððår låss ðårmåàblå ðàrt îf thå fîrmàtiîn, whiñh is àlsî thå råàsîn fîr nît àñhiåvåmånt fàilurå îf thå ðlànnåd ðrîduñtiîn ràtås.
Thus, ðîssiblå råàsîns fîr àñhiåvåmånt fàilurå îf thå ðlànnåd ðrîduñtiîn ràtås mày bå à smàll numbår îf stàgås/fràñturås îf thå MSHF, às wåll às ðånåtràtiîn by à hîrizîntàl wållbîrå îf thå ðrådîminàntly uððår låss ðrîduñtivå ðàrt îf thå fîrmàtiîn ÀB11.

Ànàlysis îf thå àððliñàbility îf thå MSHF tåñhniquå tàking intî àññîunt influånñå thå rîñk måñhàniñàl ðrîðårtiås tî thå fràñturå ðrîðàgàtiîn

Às it wàs måntiînåd båfîrå, in 5 îf thå 15 wålls, whårå thå tåñhnîlîgy îf hîrizîntàl sidåtràñking with MSHF wàs àððliåd, à bråàkthrîugh îf thå fràñturå in thå undårlying wàtår-båàring fîrmàtiîn ÀB12b wàs îbtàinåd. Àññîrding tî thå wålls, thå åxðåñtåd îil ðrîduñtiîn ràtå wàs nît àñhiåvåd duå tî làrgå initiàl wàtår ñut. In this tårms, àn àssåssmånt îf thå risk îf bråàkthrîugh îf à fràñturå intî thå undårlying fîrmàtiîn ÀB12b is àn àñtuàl tàsk in thå sålåñtiîn îf wåll-ñàndidàtås fîr sidåtràñking with MSHF.
First îf àll, àn àssåssmånt îf thå bråàkthrîugh îf thå fràñturå in thå undårlying fîrmàtiîn wàs ñàrriåd îut frîm thå ðîint îf viåw îf thå fåàturås îf thå gåîlîgiñàl såñtiîn in thå intårvàl îf thå ðrîduñtivå fîrmàtiîn. À màð îf imðårmåàblå intårlàyår thiñknåss båtwåån thå ðrîduñtivå fîrmàtiîn ÀB11 ànd wàtår-båàring ÀB12b (Figurå 3) wàs unlîàdåd frîm thå gåîlîgiñàl mîdål îf Fiåld X.
 
Figurå 3. Màð îf imðårmåàblå intårlàyår thiñknåssås
Distributiîn ñhàràñtår îf àn imðånåtràblå làyår båtwåån fîrmàtiîns is dåtårminåd by thå ñîmðlåxity îf thå struñturàl ðlàn îf Fiåld X, whiñh råðråsåntåd by thå syståm îf dåðråssiîns ànd uðlifts, às wåll às thå fåàturås îf thå ñînditiîns îf thå ñîàstàl-màrinå dåðîsitiînàl ånvirînmånt. Thå vàriàbility in thå thiñknåss îf ñlàys ànd ñlàyåy siltstînås thrîughîut thå åntirå àråà îf thå Fiåld wàs simultànåîusly ñîntrîllåd bîth by thå nàturå îf thå struñturàl ðlànå ñhàngå ànd by thå rhythm îf thå ñîàstàl-màrinå sådimåntàtiîn ñînditiîns thàt tîîk ðlàñå in thå trànsitiîn zînå lîñàtåd båtwåån thå middlå bàsis îf stîrm ànd ñàlm wàvås. This zînå is ñhàràñtårizåd by ñhànging ñînditiîns îf high ànd lîw wàvå ånårgy. Thus, înly hugå thiñknåssås îf àn imðånåtràblå intårlàyår àrå åvidånt in sîmå ðàrts îf thå Fiåld. Thå imðårmåàblå làyår is ñhàràñtårizåd by muñh smàllår thiñknåssås îr ñîmðlåtå àbsånñå îf it in thå nîrthårn, sîuth-åàstårn ànd sîuth-wåstårn ðàrts îf Fiåld tårritîry. Thus, it båñîmås îbviîus thàt MSHF àððliñàtiîn în thå wålls lîñàtåd in zînås îf ðîîr imðårmåàblå intårlàyår thiñknåssås, thå bråàkthrîugh îf thå fràñturå intî thå undårlying wàtår-båàring fîrmàtiîn ÀB12b is mîst likåly. Àññîrdingly, in àråàs with màximum thiñknåss îf àn imðårmåàblå intårlàyår, thå risk îf bråàkthrîugh îf thå fràñturå is muñh lîwår. 
It shîuld bå nîtåd thàt this màð råflåñts înly thå thiñknåss îf thå imðårmåàblå intårlàyår, but it dîås nît ñîntàin infîrmàtiîn àbîut thå lithîlîgiñàl ñîmðîsitiîn ànd rîñk måñhàniñàl ðrîðårtiås, whiñh ñîmðîså thå gåîlîgiñàl såñtiîn in thå intårvàl îf thå ðrîduñtivå fîrmàtiîn, ànd thå rîñks thàt îvårliå àbîvå ànd undårliå bålîw it. Thus, thårå is à nååd tî dåvålîð à måthîdîlîgy thàt àllîws, tàking intî àññîunt thå rîñk måñhàniñàl ðrîðårtiås, tî sålåñt thå zînås whårå thå MSHF tåñhnîlîgy ñàn bå àððliåd ànd à bråàkthrîugh in thå undårlying fîrmàtiîn will nît bå îbtàinåd. Thus, àññîrding tî this såñtiîn îf thå ðrîjåñt, thå fîllîwing îbjåñtivå wàs såt: thå ñråàtiîn îf à màthåmàtiñàl mîdål thàt àllîws tî quiñkly dåtårminå thå gåîmåtriñ ðàràmåtårs îf thå hydràuliñ fràñturås, ñînsidåring thå håtårîgånåity îf thå lithîlîgiñàl såñtiîn, thå rîñk måñhàniñàl ðrîðårtiås ànd thå ñurrånt råsårvîir ðråssurå. Sî, fîr thå ràðid àssåssmånt îf thå màximum àllîwàblå hàlf-långth îf thå fràñturå in thå wåll-ñàndidàtås, whiñh hàvå nî bråàkthrîugh intî thå undårlying ÀB12b làyår, à màthåmàtiñàl mîdål wàs ñråàtåd in thå sîftwàrå ðrîduñt Ðythîn. Thå initiàl dàtà fîr thå mîdål wårå thå lithîlîgiñàl såñtiîn îf thå gåîlîgiñàl mîdål, thå rîñk måñhàniñàl ðrîðårtiås îf åàñh lithîlîgiñàl tyðå îf thå rîñk (Yîungs mîdulus, Ðîissîns's Ràtiî, Fràñturå initiàtiîn ðråssurå gràdiånt), thå tåñhnîlîgiñàl ðàràmåtårs îf thå MSHF (visñîsity ànd ðumð ràtå), råsårvîir ðråssurå ànd ðårfîràtiîn intårvàls. This mîdål àllîws tî ñàlñulàtå àll gåîmåtriñ ðàràmåtårs (hàlf-långth îf thå fràñturå, its àvåràgå ànd màximum fràñturå width àt thå wållbîrå, thå dåðth îf thå tîð ànd bîttîm îf thå fràñturå, fràñturå håight) îf thå fràñturå àt thå stàgå îf injåñting à fràñturing fluid withîut ðrîððànt. Ñråàtåd fràñturås hàvå àn ålliðtiñàl shàðå àt thå wållbîrå ànd its långth is muñh gråàtår thàn thå håight. This fràñturå shàðå ñîrråsðînds tî înå whiñh wàs intrîduñåd by Ðårkins, Kårn ànd Nîrdgrån (ÐKN).
Tî îbtàin àn àññuràtå råsult în thå gåîmåtry îf thå fràñturå, it is nåñåssàry tî hàvå àññuràtå dàtà îf lithîlîgy ànd rîñk måñhàniñàl ðrîðårtiås ñîmðîsing thå gåîlîgiñ såñtiîn îf thå gåîlîgiñàl mîdål, às thå vàriàbility îf lithîlîgy dåtårminås thå vàriàbility îf thå fràñturå ðrîðîgàtiîn ðàràmåtårs. In thå gåîlîgiñàl mîdål, åàñh lithîlîgiñàl tyðå îf rîñk wàs àssignåd måñhàniñàl ðrîðårtiås (Yîungs mîdulus, Ðîissîns's Ràtiî, Fràñturå initiàtiîn ðråssurå gràdiånt). Rîñk måñhàniñàl ðrîðårtiås wårå tàkån frîm thå råsults îf làbîràtîry studiås îf thå ålàstiñ ñhàràñtåristiñs îf fîrmàtiîn rîñks îf Fiåld X.
Thån thå fîllîwing ðàràmåtårs wårå ñàlñulàtåd fîr åàñh gåîlîgiñàl mîdål ñåll:
1. Îvårburdån stråss, àtm: 
                                                                                                                                        
2. Minimum hîrizîntàl stråss, àtm: 
                                                                                                  
3. Màximum hîrizîntàl stråss, àtm: 
                                                             ,                                                                 
4. Fràñturå initiàtiîn ðråssurå (FIÐ), àtm: 
                                                                                                                   
5. Tånsilå strångth îf thå rîñk àt bråàk with shåàr, àtm 
                                                                                                       
Àll dåsignàtiîns àrå liståd in Àððåndix in thå såñtiîn Nîmånñlàturå.
Thå initiàl dàtà wàs lîàdåd intî à màthåmàtiñàl mîdål in thå fîrm îf à filå ñîntàining à tàblå with thå fîllîwing ñîlumns: Dåðth îf thå ñåll, ñîdå îf lithîlîgy, Yîungs mîdulus, Ðîissîns's Ràtiî, Fràñturå initiàtiîn ðråssurå (FIÐ), tånsilå strångth îf thå rîñk àt bråàk with shåàr. This filå wàs unlîàdåd frîm Ðåtrål sîftwàrå. Thå dåðth ståð sizå in this filå must bå åquàl tî thå sðåñifiåd ñåll sizå in thå màthåmàtiñàl mîdål. In furthår ñàlñulàtiîns, thå ñåll sizå wàs tàkån às 0.5 m.

Àlgîrithm fîr ñàlñulàting à màthåmàtiñàl mîdål

Thå ñråàtåd màthåmàtiñàl mîdål îðåràtås àññîrding tî thå fîllîwing àlgîrithm (Figurå 4)














Figurå 4. Àlgîrithm îf màthåmàtiñàl mîdål

Ståð 1. Såtting àn àrrày îf ñålls îf thå sàmå sizå , àn àrrày îf fràñturå widths in åàñh ñåll, à timå îf "lifå" àrrày îf åàñh ñåll  , ànd åàñh ñåll is àutîmàtiñàlly àssignåd its initiàl dàtà. Nðårf is ðårfîràtåd intårvàl îf thå fîrmàtiîn.
Ståð 2. Ñàlñulàtiîn îf Fràñturå åxtånsiîn ðråssurå ànd fràñturå width in åàñh ñåll àññîrding tî thå ÐKN mîdål [5]:
                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                               

Àll dåsignàtiîns àrå liståd in Àððåndix in thå såñtiîn Nîmånñlàturå.                                                                                                  
Ståð 3. Ñhåñking îf thå fràñturå ðrîðàgàtiîn ñînditiîns. Thå ñråàtåd shåàring strångth în înå îf thå fàñås îf thå ñåll must åxñååd thå Tånsilå strångth îf thå rîñk àt bråàk with shåàr în this fàñå ( ). Fîr thå dåvålîðmånt îf à fràñturå, it is nåñåssàry tî åxåñutå àt låàst înå ñînditiîn:  

                 
                                              Fràñturå uðwàrd ðrîðàgàtiîn;                                                                                             
                                               Fràñturå fîrwàrd ðrîðàgàtiîn;                                                        
                                                                                                   Fràñturå downward ðrîðàgàtiîn;
Ståð 4. Ñhåñking thå màtåriàl bàlànñå (thå vîlumå îf thå injåñtåd fràñturing fluid shîuld bå åquàl tî thå vîlumå in thå fràñturå, àssuming thàt thårå is nî filtràtiîn îf thå fràñturing fluid intî thå fîrmàtiîn duå tî its lîw ðårmåàbility);
Ståð 5. Ñhåñking thå ñînditiîn îf thå ñàlñulàtiîn ñîmðlåtiîn. Thå ñînditiîn fîr ñîmðlåting thå ñàlñulàtiîn ñàn bå îf twî tyðås: thå àñhiåvåmånt îf à givån hàlf-långth îf thå fràñturå (ñînditiîn Nî. 1) îr thå àñhiåvåmånt îf à givån dåðth îf thå fràñturå bîttîm (ñînditiîn Nî. 2).
It shîuld bå nîtåd thàt thå àbîvå fîrmulàs àrå vàlid undår thå fîllîwing àssumðtiîns [6]:
1. Àbsånñå îf thå fràñturå fluid filtràtiîn intî thå fîrmàtiîn (thå ðrîduñtivå fîrmàtiîn is lîw ðårmåàblå);
2. Làminàr flîw îf thå fràñturing fluid insidå thå fràñturå;
3. Dåfîrmàtiîns àrå flàt, nîrmàl tî thå diråñtiîn îf fràñturå ðrîðàgàtiîn;
4. Ålliðtiñàl ñrîss-såñtiîn îf thå fràñturå;
5. Thå rîñk hàs thå ðrîðårtiås îf à hîmîgånåîus, ålàstiñ, isîtrîðiñ màtåriàl.
Tî vårify thå ñîrråñtnåss îf thå mîdål, thå initiàl dàtà frîm thå hydràuliñ fràñturing råðîrts wårå tàkån. Figurå 5 shîws à ñrîss-ðlît àt thå dåðth îf thå fràñturå bîttîm. Tî vårify thå dåðth îf thå bîttîm, thå tårminàtiîn ñînditiîn wàs tî àñhiåvå thå såt vàluå îf thå hàlf-långth îf thå fràñturå frîm thå råðîrt îf thå hydràuliñ fràñturing (ñînditiîn Nî.1). Thå dåðth îf thå fràñturå bîttîm is mîst imðîrtànt fîr åstimàting its bråàkthrîugh intî thå undårlying wàtår-båàring fîrmàtiîn ÀB12b. Thå råsult îbtàinåd indiñàtås àn àññuràtå ñàlñulàtiîns îf thå dåðth îf thå fràñturå bîttîm. Thus, it ñàn bå sàid thàt à ñîmðàràtivå ànàlysis îf thå fràñturå gåîmåtry àññîrding tî thå mîdål ànd àññîrding tî thå hydràuliñ fràñturå råðîrts ñînfirmåd thå àññuràñy îf thå ñråàtåd màthåmàtiñàl mîdål ñàlñulàtiîns.




















Figurå 5. Råsults îf tåsting thå mîdål îf thå thå fràñturå bîttîm dåðth

À màð îf MSHF àððliñàbility ñràtiîn

Fîr quiñk åstimàtiîn îf thå MSHF fåàsibility àððliñàtiîn in thå ðrîjåñt wåll-ñàndidàtås îf Fiåld X, à màð îf thå àððliñàbility îf this tåñhnîlîgy wàs ñînstruñtåd (à màð îf thå màximum àllîwàblå hàlf-långth (Lf) îf thå fràñturå, withîut bråàkthrîugh îf thå fràñturå in thå undårlying wàtår-båàring fîrmàtiîn ÀB12b). Fîr thå màð ñînstruñtiîn, à grid îf ñàlñulàtiîn ðîints wàs ñråàtåd with thå distànñå båtwåån thå ðîints ñîrråsðînding tî thå àñtuàl distànñå båtwåån thå wålls (500 ? 500 m). Thå ñàlñulàtiîn ðîints àrå ðråsåntåd in Figurå 6. Fîr åàñh ñàlñulàtiîn ðîint, à ñàlñulàtiîn wàs màdå in thå Ðythîn sîftwàrå using this màthåmàtiñàl mîdål, with thå ñînditiîn îf tårminàting ñàlñulàtiîn Nî. 2 (råàñhing thå sðåñifiåd dåðth îf thå fràñturå bîttîm). Às à dåðth îf thå fràñturå bîttîm, thå vàluå îf thå  wàtår-sàturàtåd fîrmàtiîn ÀB12b tîð wàs såt tî ñîmðlåtå thå ñàlñulàtiîn. Thus, àt åàñh ðîint, thå màximum vàluå îf thå hàlf-långth îf thå fràñturå (Lf) wàs îbtàinåd, àt whiñh à fràñturå bråàkthrîugh in thå undårlying wàtår-båàring fîrmàtiîn wàs nît àñhiåvåd. Thåså dàtà wårå thån usåd tî ñråàtå thå màð îf màximum Lf withîut fràñturå bråàñkthrîuth in thå undårlying wàtår-båàring fîrmàtiîn ÀB12b (Figurå 7). Wå ñàllåd it thå màð îf thå àððliñàbility îf thå MSHF in thå Fiåld X. This màð àlsî shîws wålls with thå àñtuàl råàlizåd sidåtràñking with MSHF.






















Figurå 6. Syståm îf ñàlñulàtiîn ðîints                                          Figurå 7.  Màð îf màximum Lf withîut fràñturå bråàkthrîugh 
in wàtår-båàring fîrmàtiîn ÀB12

Ànàlysis îf thå îbtàinåd dàtà ànd ñråàtåd màð màdå it ðîssiblå tî ñînñludå thàt thå màjîrity îf wålls with bråàkthrîugh îf thå fràñturå hàvå, àññîrding tî hydràuliñ fràñturing råðîrts, Lf gråàtår thàn thå màximum àllîwàblå îbtàinåd by thå mîdål. À ñîmðàrisîn îf thå àñtuàl hàlf-långth îf thå fràñturå ànd thå hàlf-långth, whiñh is simulàtåd frîm thå mîdål, is ðråsåntåd in Tàblå 2.
Tàblå 2 - Ñîmðàrisîn båtwåån àñtuàlly råñåivåd ànd simulàtåd hàlf-långth îf thå fràñturå (Lf)

Wåll	Fàñt Lf  frîm Hydràuliñ fràñturing råðîrts, m	Lf  àññîrding tî mîdål, m	Fàñt of fràñturå bråàñkthrîugh 
X1	90 	15	+
X2	105	93.4	+
X3	55	15.5	+
X4	60.7	38	+
X5	80	55.6	
X6	33.4	33	
X7	60	92.7	
X8	145	164.7	
X9	70	16	
X10	59	29	
X11	56	16	+
X12	81	50	+
X13	80	29	
X14	60	60	
X15	66	18	+

Thus, it ñàn bå såån frîm thå tàblå thàt in thå wålls whårå thå fràñturå bråàkthrîugh wàs îbtàinåd, thå àñtuàl fràñturå hàlf-långth (Lf) åxñååds thå màximum àllîwàblå (ñàlñulàtåd by thå mîdål) fràñturå hàlf-långth. Àt thåså wålls, à fràñturå bråàkthrîugh ñîuld bå àvîidåd, by råduñing thå ðrîjåñtåd hàlf-långth îf thå hydràuliñ fràñturå.
Thå disñråðànñy båtwåån thå ñàlñulàtåd ànd simulàtåd Lf vàluås fîr wålls whårå à fràñturå bråàkthrîugh wàs nît îbtàinåd ñàn bå åxðlàinåd by tàking intî àññîunt thå diffårånt råsårvîir ðråssurå vàluås in thå ñàlñulàtiîns. Sî, whån ñàlñulàting thå MSHF dåsign, råsårvîir ðråssurå wàs tàkån intî àññîunt, ñîrråsðînding tî thå dàtå îf its råàlizàtiîn. Whåråàs ñråàtåd màð wàs ñàrriåd îut tàking intî àññîunt thå ñurrånt råsårvîir ðråssurås.


Wåll-ñàndidàtås sålåñtiîn ðrîñådurå

În thå bàsis îf à simultànåîusly ànàlysis îf thå màð îf màximum Lf withîut fràñturå bråàkthrîugh in wàtår-båàring fîrmàtiîn ÀB12b ànd màð îf råsiduàl råsårvås (01.07.2014), fîur ðîtåntiàl zînås wårå idåntifiåd, whårå thå MSHF tåñhnîlîgy ñàn bå àððliñàtåd ànd whårå råsiduàl råsårvås ñàn still bå ðrîduñåd (Figurå 8).
















Figurå 8. Sålåñtiîn îf ðîtåntiàl àråàs fîr sidåtràñking

Thån, åàñh îf thå zînås wàs ànàlyzåd in îrdår tî sålåñt thå wåll-ñàndidàtås tî àððliñàtå thå sidåtràñking tåñhnîlîgy with thå MSHF. Thus, thå ðrîduñtiîn histîry îf thå wålls lîñàtåd in åàñh îf thå sålåñtåd zînås wàs ànàlyzåd. In twî îf thåm, såvån ðîtåntiàl wåll-ñàndidàtås wårå sålåñtåd fîr thå sidåtràñking with MSHF (Figurå 9).














Figurå 9. Wåll-ñàndidàtås fîr sidåtràñking

Nîtå. Thå imàgå îf thå sidåtràñk tràjåñtîry is råðråsåntåd în thå màð frîm thå ðîint îf intårsåñtiîn with thå tîð îf thå ðrîduñtiîn fîrmàtiîn ÀB11.
In thå màrginàl zînå îf thå fîrmàtiîn (Well X14 area), råsårvås àññîrding tî thå gåîlîgiñàl mîdål àrå nît ñînfirmåd, ànd thåråfîrå sålåñtiîn îf wåll-ñàndidàtås in this zînå is àññîmðàniåd by high risks. Thåråfîrå, thå wåll-ñàndidàtås in this zînå wårå nît sålåñtåd. In thå zînå whårå thå wåll X7 is lîñàtåd (Well X7 area), thå whîlå wålls àrå in àñtivå stàtus. In this zînå, thårå àrå nî ðîtåntiàl wåll-ñàndidàtås, whårå sidåtràñking wîuld bå nåñåssàry.

Simulation

Înñå thå ñàndidàtå wålls wårå sålåñtåd, thå issuå îf ñîrråñt ñàlñulàting thåir dynàmiñ ðàràmåtårs wårå åssåntiàl. Sî, fîr åstimàtiîn îf dynàmiñ ðàràmåtårs, tàking intî àññîunt trànsiånt rågimå ànd hydràuliñ fràñturås mîdåling, wàs ñàrriåd îut using thå numåriñàl måthîd in thå sðåñiàlizåd sîftwàrå ðrîgràms RåXLàb ànd RN-KIM MÀGMÀ. Fîr åàñh wåll-ñàndidàtå, à simðlå mîdål with à squàrå dràinàgå zînå îf 500 ? 500 m (Figurå 10) wàs ñråàtåd.










Figurå 10. Fràñturå ànd dràinàgå àråà mîdåls (RåXLàb ànd RN-KIM MÀGMÀ)
Fîr thå ñàlñulàtiîn, thå ðrîduñtiîn ñînditiîns îf thå wåll in thå dràinàgå àråà with ñînstànt ðråssurå bîundàriås wårå såt, wåll ðrîduñtiîn with ñînstànt bîttîm hîlå ðråssurå (BHÐ) ànd vàriàblå flîw ràtå wàs åstàblishåd, whiñh àllîws tî tàkå intî àññîunt thå duràtiîn îf thå trànsiånt flîw rågimå, ànd ñàlñulàtå thå wåll ðrîduñtiîn ràtå àt thå ståàdy-stàtå rågimå. Figurå 11 shîws àn åxàmðlå îf ñàlñulàting thå dynàmiñ ðàràmåtårs îf Wåll X9 using thå RåXLàb sîftwàrå ðrîgràm. Ñàlñulàtiîns shîwåd thàt thå flîw ràtås ñîrråsðînding tî thå ståàdy-stàtå rågimå ñîrråsðînd tî ànàlytiñàl vàluås ñàlñulàtåd by thå Lå fîrmulàå [1].

 

Figurå 11. Åxàmðlå îf Wåll X9 ðårfîrmànñå simulàtåd in thå RåxLàb sîftwàrå ðrîgràm
Thus, this tåñhniquå àllîws ñîrråñtly ðrådiñting thå initiàl wåll ðrîduñtiîn ràtås ñîrråsðînding tî thå trànsiånt flîw rågimå, às wåll às thå ståàdy-stàtå flîw ràtås ñîrråsðînding tî thå ànàlytiñàl åstimàtiîn by thå Li måthîd [1].
Thå nåxt ståð wàs tî ñråàtå à fîråñàst îf thå dynàmiñ ðàràmåtårs îf thå wålls. Tî dî this, thå ñurrånt hydrîdynàmiñ mîdål îf Fiåld X wàs tàkån, whiñh wàs àdàðtåd, thån fîr åàñh wåll dynàmiñ ðårfîrmànñå ðàràmåtårs wårå ñàlñulàtåd tàking intî àññîunt thå îðåràtiîn îf îthår ðrîduñtiîn ànd injåñtiîn wålls.
Gràðhs råðråsånt thå wåll-ñàndidàtås’ ðårfîrmànñå ðàràmåtårs fîr à fivå-yåàr fîråñàst ðåriîd in ñîmðàrisîn if thåy wårå likå à 300 m lîng hîrizîntàl sidåtràñks with thå MSHF îr 500 m lîng infill drillåd hîrizîntàl wålls (Figurå 12).

Wåll-ñàndidàtå 1. Wåll ðårfîrmànñå ñhàràñtåristiñs. Ñîmðàrisîn båtwåån às wåll hîrizîntàl sidåtràñk ànd às hîrizîntàl infill drillåd wåll 







Wåll-ñàndidàtå 2 





Wåll-ñàndidàtå 3 





Wåll-ñàndidàtå 4 





Wåll-ñàndidàtå 5 





Wåll-ñàndidàtå 6 







Wåll-ñàndidàtå 7 






Figurå 12. Ñîmðàràtivå wåll-ñàndidàtås’ ðårfîrmànñå ñhàràñtåristiñs fîr à fivå-yåàr ðåriîd îf ðrîduñtiîn
Àððåndix 6 ðråsånts thå ðårfîrmànñå îf thå wålls às if thåy wårå infill hîrizîntàl wåll drillåd with, à långth îf 500 m with 5 stàgås îf hydràuliñ fràñturing.
Economics

Bàsåd în thå dàtà îf ñumulàtivå îil ànd liquid ðrîduñtiîn frîm thå hydrîdynàmiñ mîdål, à ñîmðàràtivå ñàlñulàtiîn îf åñînîmiñ ðårfîrmànñå indiñàtîrs wàs ñàrriåd îut in 5 yåàrs îf wåll ðrîduñtiîn, whiñh tîîk intî àññîunt thå ñàðitàl ñîsts fîr sidåtràñking with MSHF, hîrizîntàl wåll drilling, hîrizîntàl wåll drilling with MSHF, disñîunt ràtå (20%), îðåràting ñîsts fîr ðrîduñtiîn ànd ðumðing îf liquid, îil ðråðàràtiîn ànd màintånànñå îf  înå wåll ðår yåàr, às wåll às stàndàrds fîr thå subsåquånt råðlàñåmånt îf åquiðmånt, tàxås în åxðîrt dutiås, vàluå-àddåd tàx ànd ðrîfits tàx. Fîr åàñh wåll-ñàndidàtå, thråå ðîssiblå tåñhnîlîgiås wårå ñînsidåråd: sidåtràñking with thå MSHF (tàblå 3), thå drilling îf thå hîrizîntàl wåll (tàblå 4), ànd thå drilling îf thå hîrizîntàl wåll with thå MSHF (tàblå 5).
Tàblå 3 – Wåll-ñàndidàtås îðtiîn às Sidåtràñking with MSHF

Wåll-ñàndidàtå	Initiàl Qliquid, m3/dày	Initiàl Qîil, m3/dày	Initiàl wàtår ñut, %	ÑÀÐÅX, 106 RUB	ÎÐÅX, 106 RUB	Ñum îil ðrîduñtiîn, 103 tîns	Ñum liquid ðrîduñtiîn, 103 tîns	NÐV, 106 RUB
1	112	98	13.3	61.45	24	70	94	203
2	160	140	12.6	61.45	22	69	82	198
3	152	138	9.5	61.45	25	90	107	273
4	110	94	14.9	61.45	18	35	48	79
5	143	44	74.7	61.45	22	21	89	20
6	190	97	49	61.45	26	48	113	119
7	166	124	25.6	61.45	21	51	74	135
Sum				430.15	158	384	607	1 027

Tàblå 4 -  Wåll-ñàndidàtås îðtiîn às infill drillåd hîrizîntàl wålls
Wåll-ñàndidàtå	Initiàl Qliquid, m3/dày	Initiàl Qîil, m3/dày	Initiàl wàtår ñut, %	ÑÀÐÅX, 106 RUB	ÎÐÅX, 106 RUB	Ñum îil ðrîduñtiîn, 103 tîns	Ñum liquid ðrîduñtiîn, 103 tîns	NÐV, 106 RUB
1	234	203	13.4	57.78	30	100	142	314
2	134	122	16	57.78	22	74	85	211
3	145	131	10	57.78	25	91	106	275
4	61	51	15.9	57.78	17	31	39	56
5	100	25	76.5	57.78	21	17	79	5
6	124	66	16	57.78	24	43	102	100
7	100	66	34	57.78	20	39	64	86
Sum				404.46	159	395	617	1 047

Tàblå 5 -  Wåll-ñàndidàtås îðtiîn às infill drillåd hîrizîntàl wålls with MSHF
Wåll-ñàndidàtå	Initiàl Qliquid, m3/dày	Initiàl Qîil, m3/dày	Initiàl wàtår ñut, %	ÑÀÐÅX, 106 RUB	ÎÐÅX, 106 RUB	Ñum îil ðrîduñtiîn, 103 tîns	Ñum liquid ðrîduñtiîn, 103 tîns	NÐV, 106 RUB
1	308	266	13.5	93.25	32	109	165	321
2	189	168	11.3	93.25	24	85	99	224
3	191	172	10	93.25	28	106	126	305
4	131	112	14.7	93.25	19	42	55	73
5	220	54	75.6	93.25	23	22	98	17
6	291	141	51.6	93.25	28	55	136	115
7	221	138	37.7	93.25	22	52	86	106
Sum				652.75	176	471	765	1 161


À ñîmðàràtivå ànàlysis îf ñàlñulàtåd ðrîduñtiîn ràtås ànd ñumulàtivå ðrîduñtiîn fîr à 5-yåàr ðåriîd shîwåd:
1.	Drilling îf 300 m sidåtràñks with MSHF frîm wåll-ñàndidàtås givås minimum NÐV (1 027 mn RUB)
2.	Drilling îf wåll-ñàndidàtås às 500 m hîrizîntàl wålls with MSHF givås màximum NÐV (1 161 mn RUB)
3.	Drilling îf wåll-ñàndidàtås às 500 m hîrizîntàl wålls withîut MSHF givås àvåràgå NÐV (1 047 mn RUB)
Àt thå sàmå timå, it shîuld bå nîtåd thàt whilå drilling hîrizîntàl wålls with MSHF yiålds thå màximum NÐV, thå uså îf this tåñhnîlîgy låàds tî àdditiînàl signifiñànt risks inñîmðàràblå with thå ðrîfit thàt thå àððliñàtiîn îf this tåñhnîlîgy ñàn bring.
Thåså risks inñludå thå fîllîwing:
1. Thå ñîmðlåxity îf thå gåîlîgiñàl struñturå îf thå Fiåld dåtårminås thå signifiñànt vàriàbility îf thå lithîlîgiñàl såñtiîn, thå Nåt ðày thiñknåssås îf thå fîrmàtiîn ànd thå imðårmåàblå intårlàyår thiñknåssås, whiñh during drilling mày nît bå ñînfirmåd. In thå ñàså îf thå àððliñàtiîn îf thå MSHF tåñhnîlîgy, thå nîn-ñînfîrmàtiîn îf thåså ðàràmåtårs substàntiàlly inñråàsås thå risk îf fràñturå bråàkthrîugh intî thå undårlying wàtår-båàring (wàtår-swåðt) fîrmàtiîn ÀB12b. Drilling îf ðilît bîråhîlås àllîws tî råduñå thåså risks, whiñh, in turn, will signifiñàntly inñråàså åñînîmiñ ñîsts.
2. Thå risk àssîñiàtåd with thå dåsign îf hydràuliñ fràñturing whiñh is nàmåd à “sñråån-îut” is ñhàràñtårizåd by thå inñîrråñt dåsign îf thå hydràuliñ fràñturing ànd låàd tî à fràñturå bråàkthrîugh intî thå undårlying wàtår-båàring fîrmàtiîn.
3. Thå risk àssîñiàtåd with thå unñårtàinty îf thå rågiînàl stråssås diråñtiîn. Ñurråntly thårå àrå nî råliàblå studiås îf thå rågiînàl stråssås îf thå Wåst Sibåriàn rågiîn.
Àlsî, it shîuld bå nîtåd thå dràwbàñks îf thå MSHF tåñhnîlîgy, whiñh ñînsist in thå fîllîwing: åxtåndåd wåll dåvålîðmånt timå duå tî its lîng flushing àftår fràñturing, ànd àlsî thå imðîssibility îf råðåàtåd stimulàtiîn.
MSHF tåñhnîlîgy ñàn bå åffåñtivå înly if thårå àrå råsiduàl råsårvås in thå undårlying ÀB12b fîrmàtiîn. In this ñàså, thå fràñturå bråàkthrîugh intî thå undårlying fîrmàtiîn will àllîw thå ðrîduñtiîn îf råsiduàl råsårvås îf thå fîrmàtiîn ÀB12b whiñh hàs båån wàshåd by thå injåñtåd wàtår. Hîwåvår, thå ðrîblåm îf råsiduàl råsårvås lîñàlizàtiîn in thå fîrmàtiîn ÀB12b is tîî åxtånsivå ànd is båyînd îf this individuàl ðrîjåñt.









Summary

Pîssiblå råàsîns fîr thå àñhiåvåmånt fàilurå îf thå ðlànnåd ðrîduñtiîn ràtås wårå ànàlyzåd in thå àððliñàtiîn îf sidåtràñking with thå MSHF in Fiåld X with råfårånñå tî wåll ðårfîrmànñå ànd gåîlîgiñàl ðàràmåtårs ànàlysis.
Wåll ðårfîrmànñå ànàlysis màdå it ðîssiblå tî ñînñludå àbîut åàsily filtràtiîn trîugh hydràuliñ fràñturås, ànd à ðîssiblå råàsîn fîr àñhiåvåmånt fàilurå thå ðlànnåd ðàràmåtårs wàs àssumåd in à smàll numbår îf stàgås îf fràñturing.
Frîm thå ðîint îf viåw îf tàking intî àññîunt thå influånñå îf thå vàriàbility îf gåîlîgiñàl ðàràmåtårs ànd thå lithîlîgiñàl struñturå îf thå fîrmàtiîn, à màð îf thå màximum àllîwàblå hàlf-långth îf thå fràñturå (Lf) withîut à bråàkthrîugh intî thå undårlying wàtår-båàring fîrmàtiîn wàs ñînstruñtåd în thå bàsis îf thå ñråàtåd màthåmàtiñàl mîdål thàt àllîws tî quiñkly dåtårminå thå gåîmåtriñ ðàràmåtårs îf thå hydràuliñ fràñturå, tàking intî àññîunt thå håtårîgånåity îf thå lithîlîgiñàl såñtiîn, rîñk måñhàniñàl ðrîðårtiås ànd ñurrånt råsårvîir ðråssurå ÀB12b. Ñråàtåd màð màdå it ðîssiblå tî idåntify thå zînås îf "àððliñàbility" îf this tåñhnîlîgy ànd tî sålåñt 7 wåll-ñàndidàtås, whårå MSHF tåñhnîlîgy ñàn bå råàlizåd. Fîr åàñh wåll-ñàndidàtå, thråå ðîssiblå tåñhnîlîgiås wårå ñînsidåråd: sidåtràñking with thå MSHF, thå drilling îf thå hîrizîntàl wåll, ànd thå drilling îf thå hîrizîntàl wåll with thå MSHF. À ñîmðàràtivå ànàlysis îf ñàlñulàtåd ðrîduñtiîn ràtås ànd ñumulàtivå ðrîduñtiîn fîr à 5-yåàr ðåriîd shîwåd thàt thå mîst åñînîmiñàl-åffiñiånt îðtiîn is thå drilling îf hîrizîntàl wålls with MSHF. Thå àððliñàtiîn îf this îðtiîn givås 10% mîrå ðrîfit ñîmðàråd tî drilling îf hîrizîntàl wålls. Hîwåvår, tàking intî àññîunt gåîlîgiñàl risks, suñh às ðîssiblå nîn-ñînfirmàtiîn îf råsårvîir ðrîðårtiås, lithîlîgiñàl ñîmðîsitiîn îf thå rîñks, ànd àlsî thå Nåt ðày thiñknåssås îf thå fîrmàtiîn, whån MSHF is råàlizåd, thåså risks låàd tî high ðrîbàbility îf fràñturå bråàkthrîugh intî thå undårlying wàtår-båàring fîrmàtiîn. Thus it is nåñåssàry tî tàlk àbîut thå nåñåssity tî drill à ðilît wållbîrå with thå àððliñàtiîn îf this tåñhnîlîgy, whiñh signifiñàntly inñråàsås thå timå ànd åxðånditurå fîr its råàlizàtiîn ñîmðàråd tî åxðånditurå tî drilling à hîrizîntàl wåll. 
In this fiåld îf sålåñtåd àråàs with suffiñiåntly dåvålîðåd råsårvås, hîrizîntàl infill drilling with lîwår àññîmðànying risks ànd rålàtivåly high åñînîmiñ åffiñiånñy is råñîmmåndåd.

Appendices
Nîmånñlàturå
à, b, ñ, d - à ñînstànt usåd in thå first åquàtiîn
B – îil fîrmàtiîn vîlumå fàñtîr, dimånsiînlåss
h – åffåñtivå råsårvîir thiñknåss, m
 k – råsårvîir ðårmåàbility, µ m2
kf – fràñturå ðårmåàbility, µ m2
L – hîrizîntàl wållbîrå långth, m
LD – îðånåd dågråå îf à hîrizîntàl wållbîrå, dimånsiînlåss
Lf1 – hàlf distànñå båtwåån àn intåråståd fràñturå ànd thå îthår în its låft, m
Lf2 – hàlf distànñå båtwåån àn intåråståd fràñturå ànd thå îthår în its right, m
L* – distànñå frîm åxtårnàl dràinàgå bîundàry tî à hîrizîntàl wållbîrå, m
n – fràñturå numbårs, dimånsiînlåss
Ðrås – råsårvîir ðråssurå, àtm
Ðwf – wåll bîttîm flîw ðråssurå, àtm
Qi – îil ràtå flîwing intî à hîrizîntàl wållbîrå frîm înå flîw rågiîn, àtm
rw – wållbîrå ràdius îf à hîrizîntàl wåll, m
w – fràñturå width, m
xf – hàlf fràñturå långth, m
µ - îil visñîsity, mÐà*såñ
 - àññålåràtiîn îf gràvity, m/såñ2
 - rîñk dånsity, kg/m3
 - Fîrmàtiîn dåðth, m
  - Ðîissîns’s Ràtiî, dimånsiînlåss  
 - Biîtà ñînstànt (fîr sàndstînå åquàls 0.7)
 - rålàtiînshið båtwåån minimum ànd màximum hîrizîntàl stråssås (fîr Fiåld X tàkån às åquàls 1.3), dimånsiînlåss
 - Fràñturå initiàtiîn ðråssurå gràdiånt
 - Fràñturå åxtånsiîn ðråssurå, àtm
  - Fràñturå width, m 
 - ðlànå stràin mîdulus, àtm
 - fràñturing fluid visñîsity, ñð
 - fràñturing fluid ñînsumðtiîn ðår înå wing, m3/såñ
 - fràñturå håight, m.    
 BREAKS HERE

Nowadays, the problem of gas coning is essential at gas cap fields. Especially, it is related to gas cap fields with thin oil rims. This problem is so important because there is no universal, industrially used approach to delay or prevent gas coning. The aim of this project is development of innovative solution (gas hydrate barrier creation) to the problem of gas coning and subsequent enhancement of oil recovery from oil-saturated part of the reservoir at gas cap fields with low formation temperature.
From the aim of the work the following main objectives must be developed:
	Justification of the efficiency of gas hydrate barrier technique application for gas coning controlling at low temperature gas cap fields through the analysis of literature sources dedicated to the problem of coning.
	Technological and economic validation of optimal gas hydrate barrier technique parameters through analytical and numerical calculations.

Introduction
Following to the statistical data, trials of the oil rim reservoirs with a gas cap development are frequently effectless today. Significant contribution to this statistics is made by the issue of gas coning and consequent gas breakthroughinto producing wells that leads to losing gas reserves portion. Besides, ignoring of the oil rim development leads to oil rimdeforming.Due to the difficulty of extraction,oil rim oil is ranged as hard-to-recover reserves.
Nowadays, less than 2% of the whole oil rim reserves at gas cap fields are produced. Such poor recovery efficiency hinders gas reserves extraction. Consequently, during the development of gas cap fields, when gas reserves extraction is more important, oil rim reservesare ignored in majority of cases. This attitude, though it is unavoidable, contradicts the state demand for reaching the maximum level of hydrocarbon recovery from reservoir (1).
Thus, the aim of this work is directly related to the art of oil recovery optimization that involves oil rim keeping in persistent contact with producers in the oil-saturated part. Here, the gas-oil contact movement management is extremely critical (2). To achieve the desired results, the construction of gas hydrate horizontal barrier, its designing and locatingwere considered for controlling gas coning. This is an effort to consolidate new concept with previous information so that a reasonable selection of barrier creation conditions, dimensions and vertical position can be properly made (3).
One of the Eastern Siberian gas cap fields with oil rim – field D –was selected as a prospective target of research. Nowadays, the reservoirs of field D are placing on production and the problem of gas coning prevention is essential to solve there.
All in all, the main objective of this report is to evaluate the possibility of gas hydrate barrier application at the field D for the purpose of gas breakthrough prevention.

Literature review
Gradual deterioration of the oil reserves structure in the Russian Federation has led to shifting of attention direction to such hard-to-recover reserves as oil rim oil that are found in gas cap fields. The oil recovery from oil rims is much less (near 10%) (4) than from conventional oil reservoirs (near 30%) (5). Frequently, oil rim oil is ignored at all and following  gas cap pressure decline due to commercial gas production leads to deforming of underlying oil rim and loss of oil reserves. 
At the territory of the Russian Federation oil rim oil reserves are considerable (near 7 billon tons). Their development is complicated by gas and water coning, reservoir properties heterogeneity (Fig. 1) and the possibility of oil rim deforming due to application of significant under/overbalance. The most hard-to-recover reserves are related to oil with great viscosity and oil located in thin layers (10 meters or less) with large area of gas-oil contact. (6)
Considering the problem of coning, its nature should be firstly described. Generally, vertical wells system implementation involves oil rim penetration several meters below gas-oil contact and several meters above oil-water contact whereas horizontal wells are located in such a way that its lateral portion is long-distance from the gas-oil contact, in several meters from the oil-water contact (Fig. 2).
 
Fig. 1 – Gas and water coning formation in oil rim

Oil withdrawal from such wells is characterized by reduced pressure near intervals of drainage. Due to this reason, gas cap gas and underlying aquifer water breakthrough to the interval of drainage creating coning. As the result, wellbore oil rapidly becomes loaded with gas and water leading to sub-economic oil production rate. Consequently, oil recovery factor decreases (4).
All the methods of gas cap reservoirs development can be divided into 2 categories: depletion-drive method and reservoir pressure maintenance method. Also, the order of fluid extraction is important. From the rational point of view, the most efficient ways of development are primary oil reserves production  and commingled production of oil and gas reserves in such a way that there is no gas-oil contact level displacement in order not to lose oil. 
 
Fig. 2 – Oil and gas cap anticline traps with low-permeable streaks

In the Russian Federation depletion drive method with primary gas reserves production is preferred because of complexity and high cost of oil rim development. This way leads to loss of oil rim oil (7).
Other examples of gas cap reservoirs development techniques are related to: 
	application of barrier water or polymer water flooding (7); 
	commingled or alternating production of gas and oil zones without or with gas cycling for pressure maintenance (8);
	application of external gas injection in a gas cap to displace oil rim to bottom of wells accelerating gravity drive (9);
	initial application of depletion drive with primary gas reserves production to displace oil rim to bottom of wells gathering residual oil that may be up to 40% and next oil production (8, 9);
	etc.

Description of the field D
Regionally, gas cap field D with oil rim is located within the limits of Yakutia, Russia. From tectonic point of view, the field D is situated in the southern part of the Siberian platform in terms of Nepskiy dome. 
Geological cross-section of the field D area is represented by Lower-Proterozoic crystalline rocks of the basement and Riphean, Vendian, Cambrian, Jurassic and Quarternaryrocks of the sedimentary mantle. Looking more precisely, the greatest portion of sedimentary mantle composes Vendian clastic-carbonate rocks and Cambrian halogenic-carbonate rocks.
The target interval of this work is botuobinskiy horizon. This horizon is represented by clastic saline sediments of Lower ByukskayaSubformation that is a part of ByukskayaFormation, Vendian System.
Core material of the horizon mainly consists of medium- and fine-grained sandstone. However, in some wells bottom portion is represented by sandstone, siltstone and mudstone interlayering. Sometimes, carbonatized streaks occur in the most lower and upper parts.
Botuobinskiy horizon is the major prospective object at the territory of the field D that is why its geometry, lithology, reservoir properties and oil-and-gas-bearing capacity are already well-known. The horizon is elongated in north-east direction (300 km in length, 25-60 km in width). 
Nowadays, the target horizon appears to be composed of ancient regressive bar sediments deposited in different depositional environments of ancient epicontinental basin. This concept may be proved by typical thickness distribution of the target horizon (maximal thickness is in central part), overlying sediments thickness distribution (minimal thickness – in central part above the target horizon, maximal – near its pinching-out limits), coarsening-upward succession of the target interval and cements distribution.
The main reservoir of botuobinskiy horizon – Severny block –  is located in terms of non-anticline mixed stratigraphic-structural trap (boundaries: south and south-east – faults; west – lithological replacement; east – reservoir is pinching-out) and saturated with oil  that composes thin oil rim (12-16 m) and large gas cap gas . GOC is situated at the elevation of 1490.0 m, OWC – 1502 m.
Reservoir properties are laterally heterogeneous: in central part porosity changes within the limits of 12-26 %, permeability – 55-4650 mD; on the periphery – porosity 3-10%, permeability 1-5 mD. Average value for porosity is accepted 13 % (for gas-saturated portion – 12.6%, for oil-saturated portion – 14.9%, for water-saturated portion – 12.5%); average value for permeability – 356.7 mD (for gas-saturated portion – 276.9 mD, for oil-saturated portion – 899.1 mD, for water-saturated portion – 307.1 mD);average value for irreducible water saturation – 0.209 u.f. (for gas-saturated portion – 0.209 u.f., for oil-saturated portion – 0.164 u.f., for water-saturated portion – 0.237 u.f.). Also, permeability is characterized by the high extent of anisotropy.
Oil rim oil can be referred to viscous. Existent formation conditions (formation temperature is near 9 °C and abnormal low formation pressure – 132-134 atm) predetermined high viscosity of oil (near 10.6 cp). Oil density under formation conditions is 829 kg/m3, under standard conditions is 878 kg/m3.
Gas cap gas is dry, sweet with 85.58 % of methane. Gas density is near 0.768 kg/m3.
Formation bottom water is of high-salinity, near 350-400 g/l.
Summarizing all above, it is necessary to note that the target reservoir would be gas-hydrate under existent P-T conditions and with certain natural gas composition if it were not for the high extent of formation water salinity.
Also, it is necessary to mention that the aquifer is not active. 
Due to 3 featuresof botuobinskiy horizon reservoir, meaning:
	gas cap gas viscosity is three times less than viscosity of oil;
	gas-saturated rock volume is six times larger than oil-saturated rock volume;
	gas cap gas consists of great amount of methane that makes it able to form hydrates. This effect is intensified by low formation temperature.
The following conclusions may be made:
	Combination of the first two features predetermines natural gas-drive mechanism and instantaneous gas breakthrough (gas coning) in oil producers if no barrier between oil- and gas-saturated reservoir parts exists.
	Low formation temperature and gas composition in combination with fresh water injected from the surface allow to suppose that gas hydrate barrier will be able to delay inevitable gas breakthrough.

Methodology
Evaluation of hydrate stable existence conditions for certain natural gas composition
The main problem during the designing of processes that involve hydrates is to predict the conditions of temperature and pressure at which there will occur hydrates formation. 
Hand calculation methods are suitable for hydrate formation and existence conditions rapid estimation but they arefrequently not highly accurate. Besides, the problem of estimating the hydrate formation conditions is too difficult in the presence of liquid hydrocarbons for calculations by hand (24). 

Table 1 – Input data
Input data
Natural gas composition
Component	CH4	C2H6	C3H8	iC4H10	nC4H10	iC5H12	nC5H12	C6H14	CO2	N2	H2	He
V_(i ) % îá	85.58	4.25	1.47	0.18	0.42	0.09	0.1	0.06	0.03	7.36	0.04	0.4
Natural gas density ?g, kg/m3	0.768
Natural gas specific gravity (relative density) ?g, u.f.	0.637
Formation temperature T, °C	9

CSMHYD is a special computer program that is able to predict not only hydrate formation conditions (P and T) but also the hydrate Type (I or II) basing on certain natural gas composition.
The results of calculations are presented at Fig. 3:
 
Figure 3 – CSMHYD calculation results

Necessary water injection temperature estimation
Based on the results of calculations in the CSMHYD program, the minimum temperature of the injected water at the bottom of well should exceed 20 degrees Celsius to prevent hydrate formation in near-wellbore interval (Fig. 4).
 
Figure 4 –CSMHYD calculation results

Technology
The essence of the technique involves initial drilling of a branch horizontal injector that will be located at the level of gas-oil contact, having the same length and direction as main horizontal producer (Fig. 5).
 
Fig. 5 – Schematic of wells location (17)

This branch injector is intended for temporary existence. That is why its completion does not require cementing or equipping with liner. After injector construction, water will be injected until well injectivity decreases by the factor of ten. The decrease will confirm that the process of hydrate formation has been started.
As a result of above-described actions, an ellipsoidal water pillow forms (Fig. 6). The water pillow interacts with gas leading to gas hydrates creation. Eventually formed gas hydrate barrier directly above producer drainage area is impermeable to reservoir fluids. Due to the fact that the drainage area of well is of the least pressures in the reservoir, there is the greatest possibility of coning. This possibility will be fully eliminated by formed gas hydrate barrier.
The next step consists of main horizontal branch (producer) drilling from the same motherbore part as the injector. This producer will be located closer to WOC and will be equipped with slotted liner. 
After all the producer construction operations, the well will be brought into production. The bottomhole pressure should not be less than the minimal pressure of hydrate formation at existent formation temperature. All these measures will allow keeping the hydrate barrier.
The key hydrate existence conditions are appropriate formation pressure and temperature. Many fields of Eastern Siberia conform to these conditions.

  
Fig. 6 – Schematic of the hydrate barrier creation method (18)
(1 – gas-saturated reservoir part, 2 – oil-saturated reservoir part, 3 – branch horizontal injector, 4 – main horizontal producer, 5 – hydrate barrier)

Critical rate without barrier. The calculations of critical rate were also applied to horizontal wells, using the input data mentioned previously. There were used 4 models: Chaperon, Efros, Karcher and Joshi (45). There was selected the most accurate model of Joshi that accounts for anisotropy and is presented below. Also, all calculated critical rates summary table is written below. Calculations on the other 3 models are present in the Appendix B.
Joshi Method
Joshi suggested the drainage area of a horizontal well to be represented by 2 half circles with radius which is equal to b (and the same as a vertical well radius rev) at both ends and a rectangle, of dimensions of L (2b), in the rectangle center (45). Thus, the drainage area:
 
Fig. 7 – Horizontal well drainage area [45]

A=(L(2b)+?b^2)/43.56                                                                         (2.15)
where
A – drainage area, acres;
L – length of the horizontal well, ft;
b – half minor axis of an ellipse, ft.
Then, it is necessary to estimate well drainage radius reh:
r_eh=v(43.56A/?)                                                                          (2.16)
Next step includes half the major axis of drainage ellipse and effective wellbore radius rw’ estimation:
a=(L/2) ?[0.5+?v(0.25+((2r_eh)/L) )?^4]?^0.5                                               (2.17)
r_w^'=(r_eh [L/2a])/([1+v(1-[?L/2a]?^2 )] ?[h/(2r_w )]?^(h/L) )                                               (2.18)
	Then critical coning rate may be estimated:
q_cg=0.0246•?10?^(-3)  ((?_o-?_g ) k_h [h^2-(h-?D_t)?^2])/(?_o B_o ((ln?(r?_eh)/(r_w^' )) )                         (2.19)
where
r = density, lb/ft3; 
kh = horizontal density, md; 
Dt = distance between the horizontal well and GOC, ft;
rw = wellbore radius, ft.

Table 2.10 – Input data estimation results
L, m	100	200	300	400	500	600	700	800	900	1000
L,ft	328.08	656.17	984.25	1312.34	1640.42	1968.50	2296.59	2624.67	2952.76	3280.84
b,m	200
b,ft	656.168
A, acres	38815	46578	54341	62104	69867	77630	85393	93157	100920	108683
reh, ft	733.62	803.64	868.03	927.96	984.25	1037.49	1088.13	1136.52	1182.92	1227.58
A, ft	783.27	915.54	1050.38	1186.49	1323.18	1460.10	1597.02	1733.83	1870.46	2006.86
rw', ft	35.97	101.35	167.05	230.94	293.07	353.81	413.52	472.51	531.07	589.49

 
Fig. 7 – Sensitivity analysis of critical cresting rate dependence on wellbore length and distance from OWC
	
Here, the basis is the horizontal wellbore with length of 300 meters (selected further during economic analysis) and 7 meters spaced from OWC(to exclude the possibility of water coning) and its critical coning rate is equal to 11.55 t/day. 
Comparing the two base critical rates for vertical and horizontal wells, it can be concluded that horizontal well has greater critical coning rate (11. 55 vs 7.017) even without barrier, so only horizontal wells will be considered in the following section.

Reservoir simulation
Analytical calculations showed that horizontal wells demonstrate better performance from technological point of view. Even without barrier, they allow to extract more gasless oil than vertical wells in presence of horizontal barrier. Thus, only horizontal wells will be considered in this section.
Firstly, it is necessary to validate the results of selected Joshi model in order to prove its accuracy. The critical coning rate for the horizontal producing well 7 meters spaced apart from OWC with wellbore length of 300 meters is 11,55 t/day. By means of Petrel software the case of horizontal well with the same parameters was simulated for the period of 20 years. The results showed that GOR did not increase more than 103 m3/m3 during the whole period of well flowing.
The next step included local grid refinement near the horizontal injection wellbore in order to evaluate the maximum barrier extension. After this refinement the well was simulated to inject water with injection rate of 200 m3/day for the period of 1 month. The results showed that well bottomhole pressure reached 17 MPa and did not exceed the formation fracture pressure of 32 MPa. In other words, auto hydraulic-fracturing growth was not induced. Maximum barrier extension did not exceed 50 meters.
Afterwards, different cases with and without barrier were simulatedby means of Petrel software. The general thing about these cases is bottomhole pressure in horizontal producers that is equal to 6 MPa. Such simulation was made for the purpose of the best case selection from technological point view. The results of the simulation were also applied to select the best case from economic point of view in the next chapter. One example is shown below for two cases:
	single horizontal producer meters spaced apart from OWC with the wellbore length of 300 meters;
	horizontal producer meters spaced apart from OWC with the wellbore length of 300 meters in presence of barrier with the length of 300 meters and width of 100 meters (supposing that barrier was created with the help of horizontal injector branch as it was described in previous section).
The results are demonstrated that 20 years cumulative oil production in the second case is more than in the first whereas gas-oil ratio is less (Fig. 8-9).

 
Fig. 8 – Cumulative oil production for 20 years period

 
Fig. 9 – GOR for 20 years period
Economics
This chapter is dedicated to simulated cases comparison in order to select the best from economic point of view. 
Firstly, it was necessary to select the most profitable horizontal wellbore length for the well without barrier. As it can be seen from the plot (Fig. 10) the greatest NPV among single horizontal producers 7 meters spaced apart from OWC with different wellbore lengths belongs to the case with 300 meters wellbore length. This length will be accepted as a base case in further estimations.

 
Fig. 10 – NPV sensitivity to wellbore length

Secondly, the base case was compared to the case that includes horizontal producer with the same parameters (7 meters spaced apart from OWC with wellbore length of 300 meters) and horizontal barrier of 300 meters in length and 100 meters in width located several meters above the producer (Fig. 11). The results demonstrated that in the second case NPV is greater by 15.4 %.
 
Fig. 11 – NPV comparison for the cases: without barrier (blue line) and in presence of barrier with the length equal to 300 meters (black line)

Then 3 cases more with barrier lengths of 300, 400 and 500 meters in length and equal lengths of producer (300 meters) were compared in terms of more detailed economic analysis (Fig. 12).
 
Fig. 12 – NPV sensitivity to the barrier length
The option with 400 meters barrier length showed the greatest profitability, so it was compared again to the base case (Fig 13).
 
Fig. 13 – NPV comparison for the cases: without barrier (blue line) and in presence of barrier with the length equal to 400 meters (black line)

The results demonstrated that in the second case NPV is greater by 17.2 %.
Thus, for the conditions of the field D the most profitable option is horizontal producer 7 meters spaced apart from OWC with wellbore length of 300 meters and horizontal barrier of 400 meters in length and 100 meters in width located several meters above the producer.
The last step in this chapter was sensitivity of NPV to barrier permeability uncertainty shown at Fig. 14. As it can be seen from the plot NPV varies from 80 MM rub (barrier permeability value is decreased by factor of 0.5 from initial reservoir permeability) to almost 120 MM rub (barrier permeability value is decreased by factor of 0.001 from initial reservoir permeability).
 
Fig. 14 –Sensitivity of NPV to barrier permeability

Conclusion
	Optimal technology for gas hydrate barrier creation is drilling of horizontal injection and production branches where injection branch is located 1-2 meters above GOC and production branch in oil-saturated part.
	Optimal parameters for gas hydrate barrier applicationunder conditions of the field D are:

Table 3.1 – Optimal parameters
Ðressure (formation and bottomhole) P,MPa	Temperature of injected water Ò., °Ñ	Length of horizontal injector L, m	Length of horizontal producer L, m
?2,965	?20	400	300

	NPV in the chosen optimal case with horizontal producer of 300 meters in length located 7 meters above OWC and barrier of 400 meters in width and 100 meters in length is greater by 17.2 % than NPV of single horizontal producer of 300 meters in length located 7 meters above OWC.
 BREAKS HERE

An important problem which petroleum engineers are faced is to produce information. Under geologic and market uncertainties the gathering information process may take a large number of forms such as seismic surveys, core and well testing, price forecast, etc., on which oil produced companies spend billions of dollars each year [2] and the engineers have to direct this investments for useful information.
Speaking about well testing it is impossible to overestimate the importance of such type of analysis because it is the only way to directly explore reservoir characteristics in the area of the investigated well and also it allows to expand the concept of geology in certain conditions.
In this work it is proposed to apply decision analysis to the problem of producing relevant information from well testing. The well testing is supposed to conduct in the wells placed in the infill drilling area for the purpose of updating forecast for new wells. The relevance of data obtained from testing is estimated on the basis of influence on the forecasts.
As a decision analysis the method which is known as the Value-of-Information analysis is used. The forecasts are carried out by analytical models of fluid flow. As uncertainties affecting the forecasts the following parameters were considered: permeability, reservoir pressure, effective length of horizontal well, fracture half length. The forecasts updating is performed after application of the Bayes’ theorem which takes to account the newly gathered information from well testing.

Reservoir description
The considered oil field is located 485 km to the South-East of Salekhard of the Yamalo-Nenets Autonomous District of the Russian Federation. It is confined to the local excitement of the Nadym oil and gas bearing region of the West Siberian oil and gas province. The reservoir was discovered in 1982. By the amount of the reserves it is classified as small. The average properties of reservoir and fluid (Table 1and Table 2) were obtained on the basis of provided well test analysis results.
Table 1 Average reservoir properties
Depth, m	3400
Permeability, mD	3.8
Thickness, m	3
Porosity, frac	0.16
Anisotropy,kx/kz	0.10
Rock compressibility, 1/atm	5.7e-5
Swc, frac	0.4
Sor, frac	0.28
Pressure initial, atm	400
Pressure current, atm	310
Production start, year	2006

?
Table 2 Fluid properties
Oil	Viscosity, cP	0.73
	Density, g/cm3	0.839
	Volume factor, m3/m3	1.233
	Compressibility, 1/atm	1.1e-4
	Press bubble, atm	142
	Gas oil ratio, m3/tonn	102
Water	Viscosity, cP	0.29
	Volume factor, m3/m3	1.008
	Compressibility, 1/atm	0.000044
Gas	Viscosity, cP	0.00335
	Volume factor, m3/m3	0.003
Well test results and Wellwork description
As it was said before there were provided 315 well test analysis results and 288 reports of wellwork in total. The well testing analyses were grouped according to quality of results obtained. The quality control was performed by engineers of the company provided data and in this work the evaluation is used as given input parameter. For provided data a generalization was performed and the well test analyses appropriate for further work were defined. Also values of parameters xf and leff obtained from well testing were compared with design values of this parameters announced in wellwork description.
Table 3 Successful well tests
	Well test quality	Total
	Poor	Medium	Good	
k	50	174	8	232
P	66	153	7	226
xf	-	37	2	39
Leff	-	5	-	5
Drilling schedule
According to development strategy of the reservoir for next year it was designed 18 wells for drilling which belong to 5 brunches (Figure 1). The development strategy includes both infill drilling (1,2,3 brunches) and drilling in undeveloped areas (4, 5 brunches).
 
Figure 1 Designed wells
It should be noted that application of the algorithm of applying the VOI is almost impossible in the case of drilling in undeveloped areas (4,5 branches) due to the fact that the algorithm assumes the presence of surrounding wells. However, if poroperm properties of the reservoir is good enough then a well which is placed on rather far distance can be supposed for well testing.

Methods used and workflow
This part of the paper describes the methods used during the problem study. Also here presents the workflow which is combined described methods and shows how the problem was solving by means of this methods. The chapter is organized as follows. At the beginning theoretical basis of the methods is described with no deep analysis to the particular problem but with some simple examples. Then workflow description gives step by step application of the methods.

Value of information analysis
The concept of VOI for oil and gas industry was introduced first in 1960 by Grayson [1]. The VOI analysis evaluates the benefits of collecting additional information prior to making a decision.
In any investigation focused on information gathering we are planning to conduct we are faces with two uncertainties: 1 – the uncertainty of a parameter which is going to be tested, called distinction of interest and 2 – the uncertainty of test result, called the observable distinction [2]. The first one is not observable and can be never known exactly (e.g. permeability of the reservoir in crosswell area). But the Bayes’ theorem can be used to redefine the distinction of interest based on the test result, which is observable (e.g. Pressure Build-Up Test results).
Any information – gathering activity (e.g. seismic, appraisal well drilling, WTA) can be schematically illustrated as in Figure 2 where the upper part of the diagram shows how the reliability or accuracy of the investigation procedure is assessed. Here the assessment begins with a prior probability distribution over the distinction of interest. For our particular case, the distinction of interests is reservoir characteristics such as permeability and reservoir pressure in the area of designed well. The observed distinction is the data obtained from well testing conducted in an existed well which is placed near the zone of interests. The accuracy of the obtained data is determined by the likelihood function. This order of test reliability assessment belongs to “perfect” world but in reality in the actual investigation process we first observe tests results and then define our beliefs about the distinction of interest. In the case when the tests are repeated several times we can improve our beliefs by redefining current distinction of interest (via Bayes’ theorem). This order of using real test date is depicted in the lower part of Figure 2. The prior distinction of interest redefined on the basis of test results is called the posterior. The terms “prior” and “posterior” is the basis terms in Bayes’ theorem which is discussed below. The preposterior means the probability of observing different test results before the test is actually completed. The opposite direction of the arrow in lower diagram (Figure 2) represents the Bayesian transformation.
 
Figure 2 Information gathering and application processes
The general idea of VOI analysis is not to reduce uncertainties or increase confidence but it allows to make better choice under existed uncertainties. In general, the VOI can be mathematically expressed as:
VOI=EVWI-EVWOI
where EVWI – expected value with additional information, EVWOI - expected value without additional information.
Conventional method for decision making and value of information evaluation is decision tree [10]. For particular case the tree comprises Decision node (VOI), Chance nodes (EVWOI, EVWI) and Termination nodes (NPV) (Figure 3). Here the scenarios are supposed to be with different amount of data in the other words the first scenario does not assume additional information on the other hand the second scenario assumes additional information. On the basis of difference in expected values value of information can be calculated and also decision can be made about carrying out or not carrying out the investigation which brings this additional information.
 
Figure 3 Visual expression of decision making analysis (decision tree)
Bayes’ theorem
The theorem describes the probability of an event, based on prior knowledge of conditions that might be related to the event. In the Bayesian interpretation, probability measures a “degree of belief”. Bayes’ theorem then links the degree of belief in a proposition before and after accounting for evidence. In our case the event is value of K and Pi in designed wells. The prior knowledge is based on well rest results obtained in current wells. The evidence is probable result of well test. In mathematic terms it is:
P(A¦B)=(P(B¦A)P(A))/(P(B))
where P(A) – the prior, is the initial degree of belief in A; P(B|A)/P(B) – represents the support B provides for the prior belief in A; P(A|B) – the “posterior,” is the degree of belief having accounted B.

Fluid flow analytical models
For the purpose of well production rate calculation analytical equations are used which are described further in more detail. Decline of production rate is calculated by the means of decline curve analysis which is conducted on the current well. The decline curve method is also described further. In the paper all equations are presented in SI units but in calculation Russian Field Units are used so required transformation is supposed.
Vertical well with hydraulic fracture
For the simplest case of vertical well with hydraulic fracture the steady state solution of Darcy’s equation is chosen.
q=(2?v(k_h k_v ) h(P_i-P_bh ))/?(ln??(r_e/r_w )-1/2+S? ) 
where q – liquid production rate, m3/s; kv,h – permeability in vertical and horizontal directions, m2; h – thickness, m; Pi – reservoir pressure, Pa; Pbh – bottom hole pressure, Pa; µ – viscosity, Pa*s; re – external radius, m; rw – wellbore radius, m; S – skin factor.
Hydraulic fracture effect is taken into account through the skin factor which is calculated on the basis of effective radius concept.
Horizontal well
For the case of a horizontal well it is suggested to use equation known as Joshi S.D., Economides M.J equation [4].
q=(2?k_h h(P_i-P_bh ))/?(ln??((a+v(a^2+(L?2)^2 ))/(L?2))+((I_ani h)/L)? (ln??(I_ani h)/[r_w (I_ani+1)] ?+S)) 
where kvh – permeability in vertical and horizontal in directions; h – thickness, m; Pi – reservoir pressure, Pa; Pbh – bottom hole pressure, Pa; µ – viscosity, Pa*s; L – well length, m; S – skin factor;
I_ani=v(k_h/k_v )   ;
a=L/2 {1/2+[1/4+(r_eh/(L?2))^4 ]^(1/2) }^(1/2)   – for h<L<1.8reh;
r_eh=v(A_h/?)  – horizontal drainage radius;
A_h=?r_ev (L/2+r_ev )  – horizontal drainage area;
r_ev=v(A_v/?)  – vertical drainage radius;
A_v – 	vertical drainage area.
Horizontal well with multifrac
The equation used for calculating liquid rate in horizontal well with multifrac is taken from [3]. The equation obtained in the paper confirms its reliability by showing good matching between estimated and real liquid rate values, the examinations were conducted in OOO “LUKOIL” company. The authors use the following assumptions for derivation of the equation:
	There is no influence of well spacing so pressure on drainage radius is supposed a constant;
	Reservoir is anisotropic;
	The fractures cover total thickness of reservoir, flow structure in the fracture is plane-parallel;
	The fluid flow to horizontal section of the well is negligible in comparison with flow to the fractures;
	The fractures have infinite conductivity except the fractures that placed on the edges of horizontal well;
	Bore hole pressure is higher than bubble pressure.
The assumption list is valid for ours case so the expression for liquid rate can be written as:
Q=(2?k_v h)/?l (P_i-P_m/2+P_bh/2)+mQ_D
where Q – liquid production rate, m3/s; k – permeability in vertical direction, m2; Pi – reservoir pressure, Pa; Pbh – bottom hole pressure, Pa; Pm – pressure on the boundary of fractured area, Pa; µ – viscosity, Pa*s; m – number of independent fractures; QD – radial flow towards fractures placed on the edges of horizontal well, m3/s; L – distance between the edging fractures, m; l – distance between drainage area and fracture half-length, m. To clarify inputs the is presented:
 
Figure 4 Schematic imagine of multifractured horizontal well and drainage area
Turning to main equation there are two parameters that are not defined yet Pm and QD. As it was mentioned above the Pm is pressure on the boundary of fractured area and as it can be seen from the picture above the point for calculating is exactly between fractures. So the pressure is dependent on number of fractures per unit of well length so it allows to involve an influence of fluid flow interference if drainage radius of separate fracture is less than distance between neighbor fractures. The expression for Pm calculation is as follows:
P_m=(P_i-(1/2-(N-1)^2 A) P_bh)/(1/2+(N-1)^2 A)
where Pi – reservoir pressure, Pa; Pbh – bottom hole pressure, Pa; N – total number of fractures; A=(2k_x x_f l)/(k_z L^2 ) – coefficient which takes to account anisotropy, kxz – permeability in perpendicular directions, m2; L – distance between the edging fractures, m; l – distance between drainage area and fracture half-length, m; xf – fracture half length, m.
The last undefined input parameter is QD which defines the fluid flow to independent fractures in other words this component responsible for radial flow where it occurs. In most cases it is part of fluid flow towards the fractures placed on the edge of horizontal well. Due to the fact that fluid flow to the edging fractures has radial structure it can be calculated the Darcy’s equation:
Q_D=(2?v(k_v k_h ) h(P_i-P_bh ))/?(ln??(r_e/r_w )-1/2+S? ) 
where q – liquid production rate, m3/s; kvh – permeability in vertical and horizontal in directions, m2; Pi – reservoir pressure, Pa; Pbh – bottom hole pressure, Pa; µ – viscosity, Pa*s; re – external radius, m; rw – wellbore radius, m; S – skin factor.
In this model authors suggest to calculate the negative contribution to skin factor by using Cinco-Ley and Samaniego method.
Decline curve analysis
Production decline analysis is a traditional means of identifying well production problems and predicting well performance and life based on real production data. It uses empirical decline models that have little fundamental justifications. These models include:
	Exponential decline
	Harmonic decline
	Hyperbolic decline
While the hyperbolic decline model is more general, it was chosen for the purpose of forecast calculating.
The first step in decline curve analysis is to determine coefficient D which expresses instantaneous depletion rate in terms of liquid rate loses per unit of time
D=-((?q??t))/q
where q – liquid rate, t – unit of time.
Decline curve rate type is described by the empirical equation which shows relation between production rate (or cumulative production) and time. This relation is expressed as follows:
q(t)=q_i/(1+bD_i t)^(1?b) 
Q(t)=(q_i^b)/(D_i (1-b)) (q_i^(1-b)-?q(t)?^(1-b) )
where q – production rate; qi – start rate; Di – initial coefficient of depletion; b – the parameter identifies curve form and has limits from 0 to 1; Q – cumulative production.

Well test analysis
The type of well test supposed to be performed in current wells is Pressure Build-Up test because of this type of test is commonly used for reservoir conditions investigation. Throughout this paper it is assumed that the well tests which is carried out evaluates the reservoir conditions with a good quality. A qualitative evaluation of the conditions can be obtained only if derivative fingerprints are clearly identified in the diagnostic plot. So that the uncertainties in parameters measured by the well test is approximately related to the test duration [7]. 
For the purpose of estimating time required to conduct qualitative well test Kappa software was used where modeling and sensitivity analysis were done. The model was based on average reservoir parameters and maximum possible fracture half-length xf due to the fact that the xf influences radial flow achieving time. The sensitivity analysis was performed for permeability and reservoir thickness. The following results was obtained:
 
Figure 5 Well test design. Set of red lines refers to minimal reservoir thickness and enclose all possible permeability values. Set of blue lines refers to maximum reservoir thickness and enclose all possible permeability values. Green lines indicate start of radial flow
According to simulation results radial flow achieving and thus the confident in well test quality is defined by permeability. The conducted simulation experiment allows us to obtain important relation between well test duration and permeability values which can be determined during the duration. The relation is presented on Figure 6.
 
Figure 6 Experimental dependence obtained on the basis of simulation results carried out in Kappa software
It is important to notice that the logarithmic approximation describes only permeability until time 1000 hours and thus the limit of permeability investigated is approximately 4 mD. However, production lost does not allow the operator company to conduct well tests with duration more than 400-500 hours so the limit becomes less and equals to approximately 8-10 mD. This fact imposes serious restrictions to choose of candidates for well test conduction.
Another restriction which has to be taken into account when a well is considered for testing is influence of neighbor wells. It is supposed that the influence spreads until the middle of distance between wells.
 
Figure 7 Maximum possible radius of investigation.
The radius of investigation can be estimated as follows:
r_inv=v(kt/(ô?c_t )  )
where k – permeability, m2; t – time, s; ô – porosity, fraction; µ - viscosity, Pa*s; ct – compressibility, Pa-1.
Thus, having the dependence of permeability on test duration we can suppose a duration then estimate maximum value of permeability observed and radius of investigation which is corresponded to the permeability value.

Workflow
As it was announced before in this part of the paper the discussed above methods will be combined together in workflow. For clarity the workflow will be considered for a certain well. The well # 6 is considered for workflow application.
 	 
Figure 8 Permeability and pressure maps of area surrounding well #6
To begin with the VOI analyzing process is expressed in decision tree form (Figure 9). Here the decision is supposed to be about carrying out or not carrying out of well testing in current well in order to define more precisely reservoir conditions in area where a new well is planned to be drilled. The chance nodes contain expected monetary values which are resulted from NPV calculation which in its turn calculated form oil production rate of the new well.
 
Figure 9 Decision tree
So calculation of VOI can be summarized as [8]
 
Figure 10 VOI calculation workflow
Input parameters for production rate calculation are determined according to equation chosen for certain well type. Well # 6 is designed as horizontal with multi fracturing operation. All required parameters for rate calculation are presented in table:
Table 4 Input parameters for well # 6
Well parameters	Way of defining
Wellbore radius, m	0.108	Constant form drilling schedule
Bore hole pressure, atm	150	Constant form drilling schedule
Horizontal section length, m	700	Distribution base on WTA
Oil characteristics	
Oil density, g/cm3	0.84	Constant from fluid analysis
Volume factor, m3/m3	1.23	Constant from fluid analysis
Viscosity, cP	0.73	Constant from fluid analysis
Reservoir characteristics	
Permeability, mD	7	Distribution base on WTA
Thickness, m	2.87	Constant from reservoir pre estimation
Total compressibility, 1/atm	1.5e-4	Constant from reservoir prop.
Porosity, frac	0.18	Constant from reservoir prop.
Reservoir pressure, atm	241	Distribution base on WTA
Drainage radius, m	600	Constant form drilling schedule
Fracture characteristics	
Number of fractures	6	Calculation according to hor. length
Fracture half-length, m	140	Distribution base on WTA
Additional parameters	
Damage skin	2	Constant form drilling schedule
Geometric skin	-6.6	Calculation according to Cfd
Total skin	-4.6	Calculation St=Sd+Sg
Water cut, frac	0.15	Constant from reservoir pre estimation
As can be seen from the table the parameters can be separated on three groups according to way of defining: 1 – constants which are defined from well design, fluid analysis, reservoir pre estimation (rw, re, oil density, reservoir thickness); 2 – distributions based on well test analysis results (leff, xf, reservoir pressure, permeability), 3 – parameters which are calculated according to a value from distributed parameters (e.g. number of fracture is depend from leff). The second group of parameters is the most important due to the fact that the influence (distributions) of this parameters is based on previous well test analysis and a suggested well test is focused on reduction of this influence (minimize standard deviation).
Consider distribution of input parameters in more detail. All assumptions made for distribution definition are based on operator company experience and their confidence in well test results. 
Permeability distribution.
The quality of well test analysis is taken into account for distribution definition. Therefore, low quality supposes +/- 50% deviation; medium quality +/-20%; good quality – +/-10%. The deviation is calculated from the value obtained from permeability map in the point where the new well is planning to be drilled. For considered well # 6 the following result was obtained Figure 11:
 	 
Type	 Normal
Value	8.2
Min	6.56
Max	9.84
SD	0.5
Figure 11 Input distribution of permeability for well # 6
Pressure distribution.
The quality of well test analysis is also taken into account for distribution definition but one more condition arises. The new condition is the time when a well test was done. So that for well tests which have been conducted during a year, deviation for low quality test is supposed +/- 20%, medium quality test +/-10%, good quality test – +/-5%. If a well test has been conducted more than one year ago, the deviation is supposed +/- 30%. The deviation is also calculated from the value obtained from the map in the point where the new well is planning to be drilled. For considered well # 6 the following result was obtained:
 	 
Type	Normal
Value	252
Min	201.6
Max	302.4
SD	15
Figure 12 Input distribution of permeability for well # 6
Xf distribution.
The distribution for xf parameter is defined by multipliers applied for designed fracture half-length. The values and distribution of the multipliers are defined on the basis of well tests after assumption that the results of the tests are true was made. So that according to values of xf obtained from well test analysis their deviation from values noted in wellwork description were calculated and the appropriate distribution was defined. The calculated and chosen distributions with its parameters are presented on Figure 13.
 	Type 	Log-normal
Average value	0.33
Min	0.16
Max	0.8
SD	0.1

Figure 13 Input distribution of xf multiplier
Leff distribution.
The distribution for leff parameter is also defined by multipliers applied for designed horizontal length. But there was a problem of insufficient data for the case of leff definition due to the fact that only five well tests resulted in leff calculation. This problem was solved by Bayes’ theorem in the following way. At the beginning uniform distribution with limits [0.1;1] was supposed. Then step by step the five values were taken into account. Each added leff measurement resulted in transformation of firstly supposed distribution so that normal distribution for leff multipliers was obtained:.
 	Type	Normal
Average value	0.6
Min	0.1
Max	1
SD	0.05

Figure 14 Input distribution of leff multiplier
It should be noted that distributions of multipliers are defined with no respect to well types and applied for all new well.
When input constants and distributions have been defined we can go to calculation of production profile. For considered well # 6 for the purpose of fluid flow rate calculation the equation described above. The flow rate decline is determined according to parameters Di=0.3 and b=0.9 enclosed in equation described above. As a result of calculating the total production is determined (Figure 15).
 
Figure 15 Total liquid production of well # 6
The calculated totals result to NPV distribution. The economic model has not been discussed due to the company policy. The company provided a Microsoft Excel module for economic calculation where total production is used as the input data and the output is economic parameters (NPV, IRR etc.).
Due to the provided module the other calculations were also realized in Microsoft Excel and the module was included into the chain of calculation. Multiple realizations of the chain of calculations were carried out using the Crystal Ball software in Microsoft Excel. As a predictor of random numbers from defined distributions the Crystal Ball uses Monte-Carlo method. 
Thus as a result of multiple realizations the distribution of NPV for considered well #6 is determined (Figure 16). The expected value of NPV distribution is EVWOI and the chance node of the tree can be filled.
 	Experiment number	10000
Expected value, MM RUB	29.5
SD	16.0
Min, MM RUB	-23.3
Max, MM RUB	108.4

Figure 16 The results of calculation for well # 6
Once the EVWOI is calculated move to the EVWI calculation where the first step is “Transform input distributions according to WTA” (Figure 10). It should be noted that only distributions of permeability and pressure are transformed. To make the transformation firstly should be defined the WTA according to which this transformation would be done.
For this purpose, a closest well is considered and the range of required time for well test is calculated by using the relation of test duration from permeability described in above. As the limits of permeability the highest and the lowest values of input distribution are used. Then according to time and permeability values range of possible radii of investigation are calculated. The radius is limited from above by influence of neighbor well (half distance between wells). For the considered well # 6 this calculation is summarized below:
 	Distance, m	                                   650
Maximum possible Rinv, m	           650
Time required min (Perm max), h	359
Time required max (Perm min), h	609
Rinv min (time min), m	            627
Rinv max (time max), m                   665
Figure 17 Limits for well test duration
Any considered test with duration less than above limit is supposed to be successful but with different confident in measured parameters according to the range determined. The range (time min, time max) of values refers to the test durations which can influence permeability distribution. The duration which is less than the range clarify only pressure value. 
Now consider a test which influences both parameters for example with duration about 340 hours. In this conditions only maximum values of permeability can be detected so the max value is considered as a result of test. According to the permeability value the duration Rinv is about 600 m so that reservoir pressure is considered to be measured with good quality and deviation is supposed +/-5%. As for deviation for permeability it is determined on the basis of minimum value of existed permeability distribution is true consideration. Existed distributions and the distributions obtained from supposed well test are presented below:
 	 
Figure 18 Permeability distributions (left) and pressure distributions (right)
Having defined the distributions obtained from well test, we proceed to transform existing distributions. The Bayes’ theorem allows to make this transformation.
For the beginning we will name the available data according to the terminology used in the definition of the Bayes’ theorem. The existing distributions are “the prior” probabilities, the obtained distributions are “the pre posterior” probabilities, the new distributions which we are going to obtain are “the posterior” probabilities. Now express the probabilities mathematically:
P(A¦B)=(P(B¦A)P(A))/(P(B))
where: 
P(A) – “the prior”, our existing beliefs that k/P is true;
P(B) – “the pre posterior”, additional evidences to our beliefs that k/P is true;
P(A|B) – “the posterior”, the degree of belief having accounted for new evidence.
To calculate “the posterior” for a particular value of ki firstly P(B) is calculating by using the law of total probability:
P(B)=?_j-?P(B¦A_j )P(A_j)?  
which results the above formula to:
P(A_i¦B)=(P(B¦A_i )P(A_i))/(?_j-?P(B¦A_j )P(A_j)?)
Having applied this formula to each value of k/P “the posterior” distribution is obtained.
 	 
Figure 19 Posterior distributions for permeability (left) and pressure (right)
After obtaining “the posterior” distribution we return to calculation algorithm and calculate expected value with information EVWI. Now we can fill our decision tree and calculate the VOI for certain well test duration. For discussed well test duration in closest well to considered well # 6 the results are presented in Figure 20.
 
Figure 20 Decision tree solved for well test duration 340 hours
Thus, having assumed different well test durations we obtain the valuation of data obtained from this tests. The results obtained for different durations are discussed in the next chapter.
Results
For the results presentation the graph of relation the VOI values on test duration was constructed (Figure 21). From the graph it can be seen that until the time 20 days the value of obtained information is positive so that it is the maximum duration which can be recommended. But a production loss is not taken into account in this graph so for a more accurate recommendation this loss has to be accounted. In spite of the unaccounted loss from this graph an appropriate range of duration can be considered.
 
Figure 21 Value of information obtained from tests with different durations for well #6
In addition, the influence of well test on uncertainties in the NPV can be observed in Figure 22 which expressed in the growth of confident and narrowing of minimal range.
 
Figure 22 Uncertainties reduction for well #6
Obtained results showed that the VOI can be used as an addition tool for well test design because according to the results an optimal duration can be recommended. However, due to restrictions the most wells are not appropriate for this type of analysis.
Also a large number of assumption have been done during the analysis so to provide accurate recommendations for a certain situation unique relations should be obtained for example permeability against duration etc. In spite of this in general the assumption that the uncertainties in parameters of well testing is approximately related to the test duration [7] has been confirmed during the work.
One more important assumption is the analytical model of fluid flow but comparing results of the same model we analyze the influence of a certain parameter on the result and the simplicity of the model can be neglected.
An addition benefit of this type of analysis is uncertainty analysis of NPV forecast.
 BREAKS HERE

At the present time, in the Russian Federation, the difficult recovery reserves account for the largest share of hydrocarbon raw materials – about 60%. According to [1] among the reserverves that are difficult to recover the following ones can be distinguished: high-viscosity oil – 32.5%; below the gas cap reserves – 16%; low-permeability reserves – 9%; thin formation – 14.7%; bottom water – drive reservoir – 27.8%.
To increase the oil recovery of such deposits, it is necessary to use oil development systems: horizontal well, multilateral well, hydraulic fracturing etc. In our case, thwo methods are considered: drilling of horizontal wells and multilateral horizontal wells. 
Drilling of horizontal wells and multilateral wells increase sweep efficiency and the profitability of low-permeability reserves recovery. As a result, drilling of this type of wells allowas the extraction of residual oil in the target formation AV11+2A of the Field X.
In this paper, the optimal design of a multi-lateral wells was selected for target formation AV11+2A of Field X. Based on the minimum necessary complexity of the design multi-lateral well, so that there is a balance between the complexity of the design and the efficiency of extraction of residual oil. 
For this, several types of multi-lateral wells were considered. Based on the geological characteristics of the reservoir, the number of the target formations etc. The optimal configuration of multilateral wells has been defined. This is planar Y-well. To evaluate the flow rate of dual-lateral wells, the Borisov equation was modified. Using a synthetic model with parameters of formation AV11+2A, a coefficient was calculated that considers the interference between the branches. 
The efficiency of a multi-lateral well compared with the one horizontal well was considered using a current a sector simulation model. 

Description of the Field X

In administrative terms, the Field X is located in the Nizhnevartovsk region of the Khanty-Mansiysk autonomus area of the Tyumen region and in the Aleksandrovsky district of the Tomsk region. The nearest town is the town of Strezhevoi (15 km). The oil field X was discovered in 1962, its pilot oil production operation has been carried out since 1966. 
The commercial oil-and-gas content of the section is associated with the following sediments: the crust of weathering of the Paleozoic (M layer), the Jurassic (J1, J2) and Cretaceous (BV8, BV6, BV5, BV4, BV3, BV2, BV0-1, AV81, AV80, AV7, AV6, AV4, AV3, AV2 and AV1).
For AV1 horizon deposits, an increasing clay across the section from bottom to top is characteristic. In general, the formation of the horizon AV1 accumulated under the conditions of the shallow sea during the beginning of the sea transgression. This is indicated by textural and structural features of the formation and an increase in clay content from bottom to top. 
The target formation AV11+2A was formed in the transition zone, which was formed during the alternation of calm and storm waves.  As a result, the reservoir is represented by disordered clay layers. The thickness of AV11+2A layer varies from 0.4 to 38.8 meters within the average formation thickness of 11.5 meters. The effective thickness of the formation varies from 5.2 meters to 22.2 meters, with the average height of 5.2 meters. The average depth of the top of the bed is 1621 meters. The true vertical depth of oil water contact is 1651.7 meters. Accumulation type is tectonically bounded by the top deposit. Reservoir type is porous. 

Current status of field development

Distribution of initial and residual recoverable reserves for AV11+2A, AV12b+3, AV14 formations is presented in the Figure 1:
 
Figure 1. Distribution of initial and residual recoverable reserves.
The largest volume of remaining recoverable reserves of the production target AV1 is concentrated in the formation AV11+2A. There is an uneven development of reserves, associated with unique feature of the geological structure. An increase in permeability occurs downward the section as a result of filtration predominantly into the lower formations (Table 1):
Table 1. Permeability of layers in the production reserves AV1
Formation	Permeability (mD)
AV11+2A	6.2
AV12B+3	40
AV14	168
There is no sufficiently thick shale break between layers. As a result, the initiation of hydraulic fracturing is not acceptable. Thus, the extraction of residual reserves is possible by drilling horizontal wells and multilateral horizontal wells.


Technical part

By the definition "multi-lateral well" means a well, which includes several branches extending from the main one. The advantage of this drilling is an increased sweep efficiency.
Multi-lateral wells can be divided into several groups in accordance with their geometry: stacked, planar, opposed, Y-well and fish bone [5]. There is a table with the main configurations of multi-lateral wells below (Table 2) [5]
Table 2 The main configurations of multi-lateral wells [5]
 
Stacked Dual and Tri-Lateral	 
Dual-Opposed Lateral and Stacked Opposed Quadrilateral
 
Planar Dual-lateral or planar Y-well	 
Planar Tri-Lateral
 
Planar Offset Quadrilateral	 
Planar Opposed Quadrilateral or “Herring-Bone” pattern
 
Stacked/Inclined Tri-Lateral	 
Radial Quadrilateral
 
Radial Tri-Lateral Extending from a primary vertical wellbore	 
Stacked Radial Quadrilateral

Each given type of multilateral well is used under certain conditions. Since, in our conditions, the target formation is the only, it is used planar geometry. Now, it is necessary to determine the minimum required number of branches and their length for effective development of residual reserves. 
The maximum possible length of one branch is 500 meters. This is due to the technological conditions at Field X. In addition, the maximum possible length of a horizontal well is 1000 meters (there is no experience n drilling of such wells in the Field X). 
The Field X already has the experience of drilling multilateral horizontal wells. Now, this is planar Y-well. 
Types of construction such as: Planar Tri-Lateral, Planar Offset Quadrilateral, Herring-Bone and Stacked/Inclined Tri-Lateral are not considered for a number of reasons. First, the necessity to use and lower the liner in each branch, since rocks are unconsolidated. Secondly, drilling of each subsequent branch increases the risk of loss of the well. Third, the rise in the cost of construction due to the use of more junction connections. 
The increase in the number of branches over a certain optimum (more than 4-6) does not give a tangible increase in production rate due to the increase of interaction between the branches [8]. Consequently, it does not give a significant increase in flow rate, with a significant rise in the cost of construction. Hydrodynamic efficiency of multi-lateral wells was considered in the work [9]. Simulation experiments showed that dual-opposed lateral wells are the most hydrodynamic effective.
It is also necessary to assess the level of complexity of the well. For these purposes, the TAML classification is used [5]. Possible types of junctions are listed in the table 3 [10]:
Table 3 Junction classifications [10]



It is necessary to determine the required level of junction complexity for the Field X.  According to the fields of Western Siberia, the options for completing multi-lateral wells below level 4 according to the international TAML classification do not meet the requirements of field development by geological conditions. First of all, this is associated with the presence of unstable rocks in the sections, which causes the binding of the sidetrack (branch) [11].
Summarizing all of the above, the optimal construction of a multi-lateral well is dual-lateral well. Based on technological limitations, the length of one branch is 500 meters. Junction difficulty level is fourth.

Analytical solutions

For analytical determination of the possible production rate of a horizontal well, a number of the following equation are used namely Joshi S.D.(1) [2]; Borisov Y.P.(2) [3]; Renard, G.I. and Dupuy(3) [4].
Q=(2?kh?P/?)/ln??(?+v(?^2-l^2 ))/l+?h/2l  ln?(?h/(2r_w )) ?  "          (1)" 
Q=(2?kh?P/?)/ln??((2R_k)/l)+h/2l  ln?(h/(2?r_w )) ?            (2)
Q=(2?k_h h?P)/?B[cosh^(-1)??(?/(L/2))+h/L  ln?(h/(2?r_w )) ? ]            (3)

  Since the maximum possible length of a horizontal well is 1000 meters, calculations are made up to 1000 meters. The parameters (permeability, pressure etc.) for the calculations are taken average over the formation from Chapter 2. The results of calculations are presented in the Figure 2. Since the drilling of horizontal wells of 1000 meters in length has not been made, it is not possible to estimate the difference in production rates between actual and analytical
 
Figure 4 Performance of horizontal well

From Figure 4 it follows that all three equations show approximately the same result. However, the least calculated flow rate gives the Renard and Dupuy equation. Proceeding from the fact that analytical calculations overestimate the production rate. Comparison of the production rate of a horizontal well and a multilateral well will be performed with the use of the Renard and Dupuy equations. 
	For analytical calculations of a multilateral horizontal well, the Borisov Y.P. equation (4) is used [6]. This equation allows to evaluate the productivity of multilateral horizontal well. However, this equation is limited to certain conditions: 
Q=2???P/ln??R_k-ln??(l sin??)/x(n) +h/(l•n)  ln?((h sin??)/(2?r_w )) ? ?      (4)
	homogeneous isotropic and anisotropic formation 
	equal angles between branches 
	the same bottomhole pressure
	the same length of the branches
	the maximum number of branches is four
	the steady state flow
In fact, these conditions are a significant simplification [12].
	Proceeding from the fact that the technological optimal number of branches was chosen two branches, analytical calculations were made for a dual-lateral opposed construction. Also, for comparison, calculations were made for tri-lateral wells (three branches). To compare the efficiency of different well construction, a plot of the dependence of the flow rate on the total length of the penetration Figure 5
 
Figure 5 Flow rate vs Total length
From analytical calculations, it follows that the maximum well flow rate can be provided by dual-lateral opposed well construction. Tri-lateral well gives less flow rate due to interference.  However, this calculation is performed for multi-lateral well that satisfies the Borisov equation. In practice, this is a horizontal well with a length of 1000 meters. Since drilling of a dual-lateral opposed well is more expensive and drilling of horizontal wells with a length of 1000 meters has a number of problems, in this field, the Y-tool planar configuration is used. 
	However, it is not possible to determine the flow rate of planar Y-well, since this configuration does not satisfy Borisov’s equation. This is due to the interference between the branches. Therefore, a coefficient was determined that takes into account the interference between two branches, depending on the angle between them. 

Modificatuion of Borisov equation

	To determine the interference between the branches, a synthetic hydrodynamic model was constructed. Since the accuracy in determination of the interference depends on the size of the cells, the cell size is 10x10x0.5 meters. The model included average data on the formation AV11+2A. The size of the model is 500x500x11. Calculation of the hydrodynamic model was carried out using Tempest 7.0 software. 
Since the coefficient taking into account the interference between the branches is used in Borisov’s equation, it is necessary to adjust the simulation model to this equation. For this purpose, a dual-lateral opposed well was built in the simulation model Figure 6.
Figure 6 Simulation model dual-lateral opposed well. Pressure.

The flow rate of the well was calculated using the Borisov equation and the simulation model. The result is presented in Table 4.
Table 4. The result of calculation flow rate by equation and simulation model. 
Simulation model	81.82 (m3/day)
Equation’s Borisov	85.62 (m3/day)
	
The ratio of flow rates equals 0.95. Consequently, this model can be used to calculate the influence of the interference between branches. Since Borisov’s equation is valid for the steady-state flow regime, a constant pressure was set on the external reservoir boundary. The production rate from the model was taken under steady-state flow regime. The angle between the branches was set from 20 to 180 degrees, with increments of 10 degrees. 
	As an example, a model with a pressure distribution for 20, 50, 30, 180 degrees is represented below (Figure 7). 

	
 






Figure 7 The simulation model of 20, 30, 50 and 180 degrees between branches.

To determine the coefficient (multiplier), it is necessary to determine the relation between flow rate and angle. For this purpose, the plot was constructed (Figure 8). The plot includes, on the Y-axis, the ratio of flow rate at various angles (?) to the rate at an angle of 180 degrees, on the X-axis angles (x) were set. 
 
Figure 8 The definition of the coefficient of interference between branches


A logarithmic relation was obtained:
y=0.1032 ln??(x)+0.4569?
where x = the angle between the two branches. 
	If this multiplier (y) is multiplied by the Borisov equation, then the calculated production rate must correspond to the production rate under the steady state flow rate of the actual well.

At this Field X there are two Y-well planar wells that have already reached steady state flow rate. For the calculations, the parameters of these wells were taken. The results are presented in Table 5. The angle (x) is 35 degrees. The data of actual well for calculation is presented in Table 6.
Table 5 The comparison of the actual production rate and calculated production rate.
Wells	The Borisov equation is multiplied by (y) (m3/day)	The actual production rate of well
(m3/day)	Error
%
1	94.418	93	2
2	121.66	107	12

Table 6 The data of actual well
Number wells	Units	1	2
Formation pressure	atm.	165	165
BHP	atm.	87	90
Net thickness	meters	3	7
Permeability	mD	14	6
Length of branch	meters	351	270
x(n)		2	2
Sin (90)		1	1
Rw	meters	0.071	0.071
x	degree	35	35
Bo	m3/m3	1.133	1.133
Rk	meters	400	250
Oil viscosity	cP	1.58	1.58
Water viscosity	cP	0.53	0.53
Water cut	%	30	16

The resultant equation (5) for estimation of the flow rate of a planar dual-lateral well for the AV11+2A formation of the Field X:
Q=2???P/ln??R_k-ln??(l sin??)/x(n) +h/(l•n)  ln?((h sin??)/(2?r_w )) ? ? ·(0.1032 ln?(x)+0.4569)           (5)
	
Sector simulation model

	To determine the efficiency of using a planar Y-well, the current sector simulation model was used. Considere such configuration of production wells as:
	One horizontal well with length of 1000 meters
	One horizontal well with length of 500 meters
	A planar Y-well with length of one branches is equal 500 meters
	Horizontal injection wells of different lengths are used (500 meters and 1000 meters). Vertical wells have not been considered, as their use is not practical with such a low-permeability reservoir.
	One of the important factors of the use of multi-lateral wells in comparison with horizontal wells is their sweep efficiency. 
The sector model measures about 5000 meters by 2000 meters. This is part of the current tuned hydrodynamic model. The development variance for this sector development are presented in the Figure 9. To calculate the hydrodynamic model, the software tNavigator is used. 

Figure 9 Options of development. Production horizontal well with length 1000 meters.
The development option 1 includes:
	Three production horizontal wells with a length of 1000 meters
	Four injection horizontal wells with a length of 1000 meters
The development option 2 includes:
	Three productions planar Y-well with length of one branches 500 meters
	Four injection horizontal wells with a length of 500 meters
The development option 3 includes:
	Six production horizontal wells with a length of 500 meters
	Seven injection horizontal wells with a length of 500 meters
The cumulative oil production was calculated for 8 years. The results of calculations are presented in Table 7. 
From the results of simulation, it can be concluded that the most effective is the second variant with multilateral horizontal well. It provides the greatest cumulative oil production. In addition, the second variant has the lowest total drilling length. 
It is also necessary to consider sweep efficiency, since the price of the drilling of a one horizontal well with length 1000 meters and a planar Y-well is approximately the same at Field X. Firstly, a planar Y-well has larger sweep efficiency than one horizontal well with length 1000 meters. On the sector, it is possible to roughly distinguish three zones: Zone A – practical net oil pay zone, Zone B – transition zone, Zone C – zone is close to OWC Figure 10. 

Figure 10 Zones of sector model.
Table 7 Ranking variance
20 years	Option of development 1	Option of development 2	Option of development 3
Cumulative oil production, SCM	231312	245715	280547
Amount of production wells	3	3	6
Length of production wells, m	1000	1000	500
Amount of injection wells	4	4	7
Length of injection wells, m	1000	500	500
Total drilling progress, m	7000	5000	6500

The cumulative oil production was determined separately for each well in a certain zone. The results are presented in the Table 8. The calculation was made for 10 years.




Table 8 The cumulative oil production for each well
Options development	Variance 2. Multilateral horizontal well	Variance 1. One horizontal well (1000 meters)
Well number	1	2	3	1	2	3
Cumulative oil production, SCM	80818	49920.7	49400	80734.9	39947.5	42957.3
Zone	À	B	C	A	B	C

Economics criteria

The economic criteria for the effectiveness of the multilateral well are described in [14]. 
Drilling a planar Y-well is advisable under the following condition [14]:
(MLW Production)/(HW Production)  >  (MLW Cost)/(HW Cost)
Data for calculating the MLW Cost and HW cost are presented in the Table 8. A comparison of a multi-lateral well with a horizontal well is presented in the Table 9.
Table 8 Cost of well
Type of well	Cost of drilling	MD well	Cost of well
	rub/meter	meters	rub
Multilateral well	28.252	2600	73455200
Horizontal well (1000 meters)	23.942	2600	71549400
Horizontal well (500 meters)	23.942	2100	57789900
Table 9 Economic parameters
Type	Cost Relationship	Production Relationship
MLW/Horizontal well (1000 meters) Zone B	1.02	1.18
MLW/Horizontal well (1000 meters) Zone A	1.02	0.98
MLW/Horizontal well (1000 meters) Zone C	1.02	1.1
MLW/Horizontal well (500 meters) Zone A	1.27	3.02
MLW/Horizontal well (500 meters) Zone B	1.27	1.68
MLW/Horizontal well (500 meters) Zone C	1.27	1.47

Based on this criterion, it can be concluded that drilling a multilateral well is most optimal. Wells from the same zone were considered for different construction

Results and Discussion
In this paper, the optimal design of a multi-lateral wells was selected for target formation AV12A of Field X. Based on the minimum necessary complexity of the design multi-lateral well, so that there is a balance between the complexity of the design and the efficiency of extraction of residual oil. Since there are technical limitations in this field, some variants of multi-lateral wells have not been considered. However, in general for such fields and formations, it can be concluded that dual-lateral wells are the best option. 
	To quickly assess the efficiency of a dual-lateral wells, the Borisov equation was modified. This modification is limited by the conditions of the formation AV12A of Field X.
With an increase in permeability, interference increases, and therefore it is necessary to consider the maximum permeability in which the effectiveness of a multi-lateral well in comparison with the one horizontal well disappears. 
Drilling of multi-lateral wells is one of the effective methods for developing residual oil, under conditions where the operation of hydraulic-fracturing is not applicable. Creating a program that, based on geological conditions, determined the zones where it is efficient to drill multi-lateral wells, and where one horizontal well, will greatly simplify this task.  

Conclusion

	The planar Y-wells are more effective than one horizontal wells at Field X for development of formation AV11+2A. 
	Other types of multi-lateral wells are not advisable at the Field X conditions. 
	The junction type 4 is used for construction of multilateral wells in Field X
	It is not possible to analytical calculate the production rate of a multilateral wells of complex configuration (difference length of branches, number of branches is more than 4, difference angle between branches). A relationship is obtained that into account the interference between the two branches for formation AV11+2A. This dependence can be used in the future to calculate the flow rate by analytical.
	Calculation of various development options using a sector simulation model. Compare different options: 
	The planar Y-wells production, with length of branch is equal 500 meters
	The one horizontal well with length 1000 meters
	The one horizontal well with length 500 meters
	As a result, the development of formation, similar in characteristics to AV11+2A, with planar Y-wells production is the most efficient method. 
Recommendation for further work

The resulting of modification Borisov eqution, it is necessary to check with the largest number of actual wells, which have already reached the steady state flow rate. It is necessary to know the effective length of each branches. 
Carry out calculations with different permeabilities in the synthetic model, as well as thickness. This will help to determine the effect of formation parameters on the efficiency of multilateral wells. The resulting dependence of the efficiency of multilateral wells on the parameters of the formation will help to determine the zones in the area of the field for drilling multilateral wells. 
It is necessary to consider in more detail the layouts of the injection wells. Like the entire waterflooding system as a whole. 
Consider the possibility of obtained an equation or improve the Borisov equation for a nonsteady flow regime. 

Nomenclature

Q – flow rate, m3/day
k – permeability, mDa
l – length of branch (half-length of horizontal well), meters
? – permeability anisotropy ration
h – net reservoir, meters
rw – well radius, meters
L – length of horizontal well, meters
? – half the major axis of drainage ellipse, meters
µ - viscosity of fluid, cP
?P – differential pressure drawdown, Pa
b – half the minor axis of drainage ellipse, meters
Rk – radial extent, meters
kh – horizontal permeability, mDa
kv – vertical permeability, mDa
reh – equivalent drainage radius, meters
Bo – formation volume factor, m3/m3
x(n) – The Borisov function is 4; 2; 1.86; 1.78; with the number of horizontal branches 1; 2; 3; 4. 


 BREAKS HERE

The oil and gas and condensate field "C" is administratively located in the Baikit and Boguchansky districts of the Krasnoyarsk Territory. The district center Baikit is located 80 km north of the deposit, in the vicinity is the village Kuyumba. And it is about 600 km to Krasnoyarsk (figure 1).
 
Figure 1. Overview map. (KrasnoyarskNIPIneft)
Yurubcheno-Tokhomskaya oil and gas accumulation zone (UTZ) is one of the most promising area in Eastern Siberia in terms of exploration and production hydrocarbons. It is confined to the Kamov arch of Baikit anteclise and includes a number of fields. Deposits are characterized by carbonate cross-section, fractured-cavernous reservoir type, confined to Riphean and Lower Vendian deposits. The peculiarity of Precambrian deposits in the predominantly dolomitic sediments composition, a complex system of fractures and faults and the latter may be either hydrodynamically permeable or impermeable. In addition, since the Riphean strata are one of the oldest oil-saturated strata, it has been exposed to secondary processes for a long time, which affected the reservoir properties of the formation. 
Precambrian deposits were considered for a long time unpromising. In the sixties of the twentieth century Academician Trofimuk developed the hypothesis that in the territory of Eastern Siberia the deposits of Riphean can potentially contain hydrocarbon reserves [7]. Exploration drilling in this area was started in 1970, when the Tyginskaya-1 well was drilled. In the same year, the drilling of the Kuyumbinskaya-1 parametric well began on the territory of the Kuyumbinsk area. During the testing of which, in the interval -1940-2351 m TVDSS of the Riphean deposits, an inflow of gas was obtained, with a flow rate of 70400  m3/day. For the first time, a commercial flow of oil in the Kuyumbinsk culmination was obtained in the K-9 prospecting well in the interval -2045-2055 m TVDSS, the oil flow rate was 43.8 m3/day. After the completion of exploration work in Kuyumbinsk area, the bulk of drilling operations was concentrated in the southwestern part of the UTZ. Where subsequently in 1981 was drilled a "dry" hole Y-1, which was laid in a zone where, as it pinched out, there are no Riphean deposits. In addition to this, 15 "dry" holes were drilled in the area, so interest in the Kuyumbinsk area was lost. The inefficiency of exploratory drilling can primarily be attributed to the extremely low degree of mapping of Riphean deposits and the erosion surface of Pre-Vendian. And absence of effective methods for predicting lithotypes and reservoir properties. However, in 1982, when the Y-2 exploration well was tested, an inflow of gas with a flow rate of 225400 m3/day was obtained in the interval of -1952-1993 m TVDSS, and when testing the well Y-5, blow out of oil with a rate of 400 m3/day occurred, which helped inspire a renewed interest in the deposits of Riphean in the Kamov anticline [16]. 
During the geological exploration work on the territory of UTZ, conditional division into zones was adopted, so that the deposits discovered in the northern part of the zone belonged to the oilfield C, and the deposits discovered in the southern part related to the Yurubcheno-Tokhomsky deposit. In 1996, the territory of UTZ was divided into 4 license areas: Kuyumbinskiy, Tersko-Kamov (northern), Tersko-Kamov (southern) and Yurubchensky. []
Uncertainty in the geological structure flowed to the geological model of UTZ deposits, in particular to the C deposit. First of all, this is due to the extreme complexity of the structure of the deposits. Often this led to a different interpretation of the data obtained during the seismic survey. As a result, due to the different interpretation of the data by two groups of scientists, geological models reflecting various conditions of occurrence of the Riphean strata were built. One model implied an oblique occurrence of homogeneous, uneven-aged massive strata cut off by the erosion surface of the Pre-Vendian. In the second, a subhorizontal bedding of the strata was assumed, with sharp lateral lithologic-facies heterogeneity. The structure of the Riphean natural reservoir is determined by the destructive tectonics of the area, which leads to the creation of zones of anomalous fracturing of the reservoir. Well test results confirm that the productivity of a well directly depends on the change in the reservoir properties of reservoir rock, which in turn is determined by the degree of disintegration of the rock. 
Initially, the stratigraphic characteristic of the deposits of Riphean was based on the stratigraphy of the nearby Yenisei Ridge. Then, the Riphean deposits were separated into a separate stratigraphic unit, which was called the Kamov series with a capacity of about 3.5 km. 
It was established that the Kamov series of UTZ has a cyclic structure. The first cycle includes the formation of the Zelenoduk, Vedreshek, Madryn and Yurubchenskaya. Further, another 4 cycles are distinguished, which mainly consist of a carbonate and clayey-dolomitic sequence. 
The Siberian platform is a typical example of the strike of Upper Proterozoic deposits. The cross-sections are presented quite fully. Carbonate sediments are quite widely spread containing stromatolites and microfossils. In the course of the sectional layering and subsequent correlation of the Precambrian deposits, a set of methods are applied, which includes the geological and radiological methods, as well as the paleontological method widely used after the publication of the first results of the sectional layering, which is carried out through stromatolites and microfissils.  After analyzing the results of the measurements of reservoir pressure, a hypothesis was advanced that the unified massive Riphean-Vendian formation containing gas condensate extends along the Baikit anteclise. 
Further studies were related to the identification of promising hydrocarbon traps, the development of a methodology for geological exploration, a stratigraphic description of the Riphean strata based on the dating of the absolute age of the rocks and correlation with strata of the Riphean of the Yenisei Ridge. It was also discovered that under the basis of the erosion surface of the Riphean there can be a huge massive deposit of hydrocarbons. 
For today the deposit is at the stage of pilot-industrial operation. At present, 56 parametric, exploratory and exploration wells are drilled in the field; operational drilling is performed. 
According to the report of the last development document, at the moment the pilot industrial development of the deposit is under way.
The high geological heterogeneity of the productive deposits of Riphean has a very negative effect on the development process. The extraction process is influenced by such geological factors as: lithology (reservoir type, rock composition, etc.); filtration capacitive properties (capacity, permeability); value of effective oil-saturated thickness of the formation; compartmentalization of the reservoir and its surface area.
For the main geological uncertainties, acting as complicating factors during the pilot development the following should be adopted:
1.	Uncertainty of the position of the OWC (OWC was adopted based on the results of testing the well C-212 at the of -2138 m TVDSS)
2.	The decline of the Riphean top in the northeastern part to -2060 m TVDSS is predicted. 
3.	Structural slope of the Riphean complex entails risks while drilling a horizontal wellbore.
4.	The reduced fold of 3D seismic in the area to the north and east of well pad V decreases the forecast value of the reservoir properties this area.
5.	The presence of fractures of orthogonal systems of anomaly.
In this paper, the greatest attention is paid to the consideration of the uncertainties in points 3 and 5. Since the lower part of the Riphean deposit is extremely inhomogeneous in terms of angles, the horizontal well with a horizontal length of about 1000 m in a single stratigraphic interval is difficult to route. The lower part of the section is characterized by a developed system of fractures, most of which have a subvertical position, which leads to various complications in the development process. 
At the moment, the deposit "C" is at the stage of pilot development. The main problem in the development of the field is the high initial water cut of well production and its rapid growth, as well as low start-up rates, which are much lower than planned. There is no reservoir pressure maintenance system in the field. Chemical analysis of water showed that water from the aquifer. To optimize the development of the field, it is necessary to limit the amount of water in the liquid, since there are infrastructural restrictions on the extraction of liquid - 1000 tons / day. 
The well grid is oriented at an angle of 46 ° in the north-west direction. The direction of the horizontal wellbore was selected based on the main direction of the fractures. The wellbore, with respect to the direction of the fractures, is oriented orthogonally. This contributes to the maximum contact area at the well-reservoir boundary. Since fluid filtration into the well occurs through fractures and caverns, the increased contact area contributes to increased inflow into the well. [16]
Methods
In order to analyze geological heterogeneity first of all seismic survey should be taken into account. Geological structure can be estimated via seismic data (figure 3). Nevertheless, preceding from a geological structure certain conclusions can be drawn from the seismic data. As it can be clearly seen from the time cross section two zones can be stand out. These zones can be varying by different reservoir structure. The lower zone is compartmentalized due to the tectonic movements and exposed to the secondary processes. Therefore, there are a lot of fractures and vuggs.
 
Figure 2. Fracture intensity comparison. (Slavneft-NPC)
Part of the Riphean reservoir forms a linear focal zone of anomalous fracturing, which has the most optimal reservoir properties. Therefore, the classical seismic faced to challenge to detect such objects. In combination with reservoir microscanners, it becomes possible to predict the degree of open fracturing, that is, to evaluate the productive potential of the object. Reefogenic carbonate constructions are determined in virtually all Riphean complexes and most block systems. They are concentrated within the zones of large faults, in the form of systems of reef-like structures or individual carbonate structures. To determine the position of such zones with an increased open fracturing of the Riphean complexes, a complex of 3D works on scattered waves and 2D seismic surveys was performed.
 
Figure 3. Time cross section (Slavneft-NPC)
On the basis of the obtained seismic results the map which characterizes the distribution of heterogeneities characterizing the fracturing of the productive Riphean interval. This map also confirms that the main direction of the fractures is north-east/south-west. It should be noted that a large number of medium-sized cracks are orthogonal to the main direction of the faults. This indicates the presence of the ruptures. [15]
Seismic survey should be carried out initially, before drilling any wells. Then when exploration wells have started to drill it is possible to extract the core. Fractures description can be done on the basis of the core samples. However, because of its size, the core does not give a complete picture of the size and direction of the fractures. The diameter of the core column can be no more than 100 mm, in turn the width of the fracture or cavern can reach 20-40 mm, and so the core sample can simply collapse during extraction to the surface.
In addition core samples have to be oriented in order to identify fractures spread. Nevertheless, core samples reflect fracture intensity. This is an important parameter that varies from well to well (figure 4). Since the inflow of oil into the well is carried out mainly via fractures, its intensity may significantly influence to the oil rate. Because of this fact it requires careful study.
However, for determination secondary porosity core samples are rather suit. Secondary porosity plays a critical part concerning the formation capacity determination. 
When the exploration wells have been drilled it is possible to carry out wireline logging. In order to identify zones of increased fracturing along the borehole it is needed to use selective gamma-ray logging and array-sonic log. As for array-sonic log, when longitudinal wave travel time increases it may reflect the presence of fractures. Concerning the selective gamma-ray logging, when concentration of Uranium or Thorium increases it may also mean presence of fractures. 
 
Figure 4. Fracture intensity comparison. (Slavneft-NPC)
Once the presence of fractures has been identified, it is required to determine their direction and dip angle. For this reason formation microscanner can be applied. It can provide real-time image of the borehole. Cavities and fractures can be seen and its parameters can be identified. Also it is important to realize that open fractures affect more strongly than resistive fractures. Direction of the fractures is important parameter and can affect a horizontal wellbore orientation. In order to maximize oil rate, wells should be positioned orthogonally to the direction of the fractures. Dip angle may influence the vertical and horizontal permeability ratio. In case where vertical permeability is much higher than horizontal it may lead to a sharp increase in water cut or breakthrough of gas from a gas cap. For the graphical reflection of the direction of the cracks and their number, stereograms of distribution were constructed were constructed. Stereograms were constructed for a set of wells where FMI was performed and for two typical wells. In addition, histograms of dip angle distribution were constructed. It was established that the areas with the most intensive fracturing are confined to clay intervals. These procedures help to separate two zones according to fracture configuration. [14]
After the well was put on production, its producing results were not satisfied. Oil rate was less than planned and water cut was significant and continued to grow. Then field geophysical survey was carried out in order to determine intervals of water inflow. According to field geophysical survey data, it was found that the bulk of the water inflow occurs in intervals where the horizontal section of the well crosses shale interlayers. 

Results
As a result of wireline logging analysis for better illustration purposes two wells are compared. One well was drilled into the lower part of Riphean deposits – below the erosion basis. Another well was drilled into the upper part of Riphean deposits – above the erosion basis. As it was mentioned above, fractures are confined to boundaries of the dolomite and shale layers. After the interpretation of the wireline logging measurements it can be clearly understood that there are no shale interlayers in the upper interval (figure5).
 
Figure 5. Surveying plane table of well C4.
In comparison with well C3 which was drilled into the lower part in well C4 shale interlayers have insignificant thickness and fractures in these intervals are not strongly developed. 
These wells were drilled one by one. The only difference is in the drilling strategy. Well C3 according to the projected drilling strategy was drilled into the lower part intersect apparently a lot of vertical fractures. Well C3 has poor production results (Qoil=33 m3/day and WCT=24% with planned Qoil=49 m3/day and WCT=0%). 
However, well C4 was drilled according to the new developed drilling strategy has much better results (Qoil=140 m3/day and WCT=2% with planned Qoil=49 m3/day and WCT=0%). 
 
Figure 6. Surveying plane table of well C3.
As a result of carrying out of FMI measurements the stereogram of fracture propagation and the diagram of dip angle for some wells were constructed. 
 
Figure 7. Stereogram of fracture propagation.
This stereogram shows the direction of the strike of the fractures. More than half the fractures are oriented in the north-east direction. The orientation of the fracture system mainly affects the orientation of the well grid and the direction of the horizontal wellbore. It should be noted that originally in the development project, the orientation of the well grid was orthogonal to the main direction of the fracture system propagation. This system is optimal because with a similar orientation of the well grid, the area of contact of the wellbore with open cracks is maximal, which should positively affect the productivity of the wells.
 
Figure 8. Diagram of dip angle.
First, because of the large number of vertical and subvertical fractures, there are difficulties in determining the depth of fluid contacts. When determining the GOC (gas-oil contact) depth, the gas begins to break through vertical cracks into the region of reduced pressure, a gas cone is formed. Thus, the reliability of the determination of the GOC depth under such conditions is unsatisfactory. Secondly, with regard to the determination of the OWC (oil-water contact) depth, over time, water also begins to break through the well along vertical cracks, a cone of water is formed, which also does not allow to reliably estimate the depth of water-oil contact.
The same graphics were constructed for wells C3 and C4. It was done for comparison mainly the dip angles. This parameter is the most influencing to anisotropy. Large number of vertical fractures and small amount of horizontal wells lead to significant anisotropy. 
 
Figure 9. Diagram of dip angle for well C3.
As it can be seen from the figure 9, the lower part of the Riphean is characterized by the presence of predominantly subvertical fractures. It leads to good vertical permeability. Moreover, in this particular well most fractures are oriented from north to south. It is also possible to note an almost equal distribution of fractures in other directions. 
 
Figure 10. Stereogram of fracture propagation of C3.
As it was mentioned above, horizontal wellbore direction is orthogonally to the major fractures direction. So, in this case the horizontal wellbore extends from east to west. However, there are a lot of fractures in other directions and they are not optimally intersected. Hence it may affect the production parameters. 
Well C4 is characterized by a wider spread of dip angles. This well penetrates disintegrated zone in the upper part of the Riphean deposits. 
 

Figure 11. Diagram of dip angle for well C4.
As it can be seen from figure 11, the upper part of the Riphean is characterized by the presence of both vertical and horizontal fractures. This may result in vertical and horizontal permeabilities being equal. Liquid rate may be satisfactory and provide economic efficiency. Apart from everything else, good horizontal permeability may provide more efficient reserves recovery and the slower formation of water and gas cones. In other words, development of upper zone provides greater flow rate and less watercut thus the oil recovery factor is greater.
 
Figure 12. Stereogram of fracture propagation for well C4.
Distribution of fracture direction is more uniformly in this case. This simplifies the problem for the placement of wells. The major fracture direction is north-east/south-west. The best way to orient wells is orthogonal to the main direction of fractures. In this case horizontal wellbore does not across the shale interlayers thus production parameters are greater. 
The field-geophysical survey was carried out in wells with a high percentage of water-cut production. In order to determine the intervals of water inflow and the nature of cracks, a complex of studies was carried out, including flowmeter, moisture meter, thermometry, and also measurement of crack parameters, such as fracture opening, crack density and fracture permeability. According to the results of field geophysical survey, it was determined that the main inflow of water into the well occurs at intervals of the clay intervals intersecting the well.
Results of the field geophysical survey will be briefly discussed on an example of the well C2 (figure 13). 
 

Figure 13. Results of the field geophysical survey of the well C2.
As can be seen from the results of the field geophysical survey, the intervals of the liquid inflow into the well coincide with the intervals of the intersection of the clay interlayers with the wellbore. From which it can be concluded that a zone with an increased concentration of subvertical fractures is located on the contact between clay strata and dolomites. Under the influence of pressure drop, the water from the aquifer starts to move in the direction of the wellbore. This leads to a rapid increase in water cut.
Riphean reservoir was divided into two parts, upper disintegrated zone characterized by the presence of vertical and horizontal fractures and lower zone characterized by the presence of mainly vertical fractures on the basis of the performed investigation:
According to seismic method it can be clearly distinguish two zones (Figure 4)
Comparing well logging measurements on two wells C3 and C4 drilled in the upper and lower zones respectively one can see obvious differences in the geological structure and fractures configuration
Core analysis also shows differences in the structure of the two zones
Field geophysical survey determine the inflow intervals that coincide with the intervals of intersection of shale  interlayers
Finally, this concept of the geological structure is confirmed by the technological performance of the wells in these two zones.





 BREAKS HERE

Drilling of wells is one of the most costly measures in the development of oil and gas fields. Therefore, drilling efficiency is very important for oil companies.
The efficiency of the drilling process means the following: to prevent accidental hydraulic fracturing and lost circulation, to avoid taking a kick, stability of the wellbore and absence of stuck.
One of the most important applications of rock mechanics to drilling is the problem of wellbore stability. This problem is solved by creating a geomechanical model of the field being drilled.
The geomechanical model of the field X is created on the basis of a set of research data obtained from appraisal wells (logs, 3D seismic, core data, drilling and fracturing reports).
The construction of the geomechanical model includes the following steps: input data analysis, evaluation of stresses and elastic properties of rock, wellbore stability calculation, model calibration, stress concentration analysis.
Well design of well is proposed on the basis of the created geomechanical model.
An analysis of uncertainties and an assessment of the sensitivity of the main parameters that are used to create the geomechanical model are performed.
Conclusions and recommendations for using the geomechanical model in the field development are suggested.

Introduction
The main purposes of a successful oil and gas producing company are stable growth in the level of hydrocarbon production, increasing the economic efficiency of the enterprise, ensuring industrial and environmental safety. The increase in oil and gas production is largely dependent on the drilling of new wells. It should also be noted that the drilling of new wells occupies a major share of capital expenditures and, accordingly, affects the economic performance of the company. At present (natural depletion of traditional fields occurs), it is necessary to drill wells in more complex geological conditions. Therefore, the issue of the effectiveness of well drilling processes becomes one of the key in oil companies. 
The efficiency of the drilling process means the following: to prevent accidental hydraulic fracturing and lost circulation, to avoid taking a kick, stability of the wellbore and absence of stuck. To reduce the risk of the aforementioned problems, it is proposed to construct a 1 D geomechanical model of the well.
The geomechanical model of the well is created on the basis of a set of research data (logs, 3D seismic, cores, drilling reports, etc.) obtained from appraisal wells.
The constructed geomechanical model allows to choose the optimal drilling scenario and allows to reduce significant expenses for liquidation of consequences of accidents during drilling.

Drilling problems
Problems in drilling wells lead to a deterioration in the quality of the wellbore, a delay in the timing of their delivery, and sometimes to the inability to achieve the design depth of the bottom. Elimination of consequences of accidents and problems during drilling leads to additional expenditures.
One of the problems is loss of circulation. The bottom line is that when drilling certain intervals of the well, the mud inflow into the formation. The cuttings are not carried to the surface and there is a risk of sticking the BHA (bottom hole assembly) on the bottom. In this case, it is possible to eliminate the wellbore and re-drill it.
The next problem is associated with the destruction of the walls of the well with the passage of certain intervals of rocks. Ultimately, this results in the risk of sticking the drill string and caving formation. The latter is reflected in the low quality of the subsequent work on cementing the wellbore.
To prevent taking a kick, the mud density is maintained at such a level that the hydrostatic pressure of the column of liquid in the borehole exceeds the reservoir pressure of the drilled horizons. 
Stability of the wellbore is determined by the absence of the above-described problems, which are interrelated among themselves. The aim is to ensure the following conditions when drilling a well: the density of the drilling mud should ensure safety from the point of taking a kick, at the same time the pressure created at the bottom of the well should not exceed the fracture pressure. It should be noted that increasing the density of the drilling mud reduces the risk of destruction of the walls of the borehole during drilling of certain layers.

Fundamentals of rock mechanics
Any rock has its strength characteristics, but they are always forced by external sources, which create a total stress in these rocks. Before the well is not drilled, the entire system is in equilibrium. Drilling a well changes the state of the total stress around the rocks and introduces a third component to this system: the rock, the stress from the inner wall and the stress from the outer wall of the wellbore. The new stress from the inner wall of the well is controlled by the density of the drilling mud. The stability of the wellbore depends on the difference between all three components of the system.
Effective stress is the difference between total stress and pore pressure (reservoir pressure). If the effective stress in the rock exceeds the value of its strength, then it breaks down. It should be noted that the excess of the total stress can occur both from the borehole side and from the surrounding rocks. Therefore, to maintain the stability of the wellbore, it is necessary to maintain a balance of all stresses affecting its walls. For this purpose, it is necessary to evaluate all the parameters that arise when drilling a well.
The effective stress consists of the following factors: mud density, rock strength, the state of the bottomhole formation zone stress, the inclination and azimuth angles of the wellbore, the pore pressure. The effective pressure (stress) is determined by three acting stresses: radial (?r), tangential or hoop (?t) and axial (?z) (Figure 1). Radial stress directed perpendicular to the wall of the borehole and is caused by pressure from the borehole side and pore pressure from the side of the formation zone. The axial stress acts along the axis of the wellbore and depends mainly on the overburden and pore pressures (if a vertical well is considered). The hoop stress, directed along the horizontal plane along the tangent to the wall of the wellbore, depends on the stresses and their directions in the horizontal plane. It is assumed that the changes in the system under consideration are isotropic. 
 
Figure 1 Major stresses

In the wellbore, as a rule, either hoop or axial stresses have the highest values in comparison with the remaining two stresses, and the radial stress usually has the lowest value. These stresses are determined using Kirsch equations (Zoback 2007).
The shape of the breakouts of the walls of the wellbore depends on the ratio of the values of the three main stresses to each other (Figure 2).  
 
Figure 2 Wellbore breakouts

If the tangential stress is the main, the breakouts are of an elliptical shape, if the axial stress has the highest values, then the breakouts have toroidal shapes (Fjaer, Holt and Horsrud 1992). With the help of direction of the breakouts, the orientation of the horizontal stresses is determined.
In addition, the tangential and radial stresses depend on the wellbore trajectory and mud density. These parameters are selected prior to drilling the borehole and, therefore, at the planning stage, there is an opportunity to reduce the risks associated with loss of wellbore stability.
 
Geological description of the oil field X
The field X is an anticline with gentle wings (Figure 4). The geological section of the field consists of the Devonian, Carboniferous, Permian and Quaternary systems (Figure 3). Basically the section is represented by carbonate rocks, which consist of limestones and dolomites. Sandstones and clays are also present in the section. The carbonate sediments of the middle Carboniferous and the clastic deposits of the lower Carboniferous are productive. Carbonate sediments are characterized by the following properties: the type of reservoir is fractured-cavernous-porous, the average value of porosity is 5%, the average permeability is 5 mD, the average oil saturation is 0.78 f.u. Clastic sediments are characterized by the following properties: porous-type reservoir, average porosity 17%, average permeability 42 mD, average oil saturation 0.89 f.u.
 
Figure 3 Stratigraphic column


 
Figure 4 Input data for the field X


Wellbore stability calculation
The stability of the wellbore is determined by the absence of destruction of the walls of the borehole (breakouts and fractures) and the presence of circulation of the drilling mud (no mud losses). 
The construction of a one-dimensional geomechanical model consists of the determination of the following main parameters: vertical stress, pore pressure, mechanical properties of rocks, horizontal stresses and their directions (Zoback 2007). Then the model is calibrated to the actual values of the borehole diameter (Figure 5).

 
Figure 5 1 D geomechanical model (final iteration)

Stress concentration analysis
For a detailed analysis of the main stresses, using the calculated model of the borehole, an interval is chosen that is characterized by the least stability of the wellbore. An interval of 940-970 meters is taken, measured along the wellbore, which corresponds to the maximum destruction of the walls of the well. The geological section in the considered interval is represented by alternation of limestones and shales.
The term mud window is defined by an interval of values of the equivalent circulating density of the drilling mud, at a certain point, at which a pressure exceeding the pore pressure is created in the borehole, and there is no mud losses into the formation and the created pressure is below the fracture pressure. If the drilling conditions allow the equivalent circulation density of the drilling fluid to be maintained within the mud window, the wellbore is stable. 
For limestones and shales, the graphs (Figure 6), are shown in which, depending on the inclination angle, the following equivalent densities are depicted: minimum rock fracture pressure (red line), pore pressure (gray area), maximum fracture pressure rocks (dark blue area), mud losses pressure (blue area). The point shown in the graph corresponds to the value of the equivalent circulating density calculated using the model. 

   
Figure 6 Mud windows for shale (depth 949.2 m) and limestone (depth 962.5 m)

In the case of shales, the rock is destroyed, with an inclination angle of approximately 28 degrees. In limestones, the wellbore at the same inclination angle remains stable and the walls of the well do not collapse. The values of the limits for unconfined compressive strength for shales and limestones are different, and therefore required mud density to prevent wellbore breakouts in the cross section differs (Figure 7).   
 
 
Figure 7 Required mud density to prevent wellbore breakouts (shale, limestone)

According to the above figures, it is assumed that the distribution of required mud density to prevent wellbore breakouts in the shales occurs uniformly along the entire circumference (the red zone), and in the limestones the distribution of required mud density is formed in the direction of minimal horizontal stress.	
For the selected interval, a point analysis is made of the change in the main three stresses acting on the walls of the wellbore around the borehole axis in order to determine the critical stress values.
The distribution of the main stresses for the interval 962.5 m is shown in the Figure 8. On the stress change graphs, the red curve corresponds to the tangential stress values, the green curve shows the changes in axial stresses and the black curve corresponds to the radial stresses. The maximum amplitude of the stress is observed at an angle of 90 degrees, which corresponds to the direction of the minimum horizontal stress. 
 
Figure 8 Stress concentration at the wellbore wall (depth 962.5 m)

To assess the distribution of stress concentrations along the entire wellbore, a point analysis is made of the productive horizons encountered in the geological section. Calculation of the mud window and point analysis of productive horizons is given in Figure 9. 
For all four horizons (Kashirian, Vereiskian, Bashkirian, Famenian), different ratios of major stresses are observed and, as a consequence, differing conditions of stability of the wellbore. It is noted that with increasing depth of the well, the relationship between the tangential and axial stresses varies. For example, in the Kashirian and Vereiskian horizons, the maximum value is tangential stress, in which the shape of the breakouts is formed continuously along the wellbore. This form of failure is confirmed by surveys of acoustic scanning of the walls of the wells (imager). In the Bashkirian and Famenian horizons, the main is the axial stress, so the shape of the breakouts of the wellbore is different from the previous two horizons and has a toroidal shape. This fact is also confirmed by the image. 
In order to analyze the causes of changes in the values of the main stresses, a point analysis of the stresses at various depths of the wellbore with different deviation angles is given. It can be seen from the Figure 9 that the main cause of redistribution of tangential and axial stresses is an increase in the angle of deviation of the wellbore. Similarly, all stresses increase with increasing depth, because vertical stress increases. As described earlier, the relationship between the tangential and axial stresses, affect the shape of the wellbore breakouts.
Thus, the angle of deviation is greatly influenced by the geometry of the wellbore breakouts of the considered well. In the borehole, with a deviation angle of more than 28 degrees, the tangential stress exceeds the axial stress (Figure 9), so in this case, the breakouts will form an elliptical shape. 
According to Kirsch's equation (Zoback 2007), the value of vertical stress has a strong influence on the magnitude of the axial stress. In turn, the vertical stress depends on the density of the rocks from which the geological section consists. Indeed, in case of field X, the geological section consists mainly of limestones and dolomites. It should also be noted that with increasing depth, the difference between the tangential and axial stresses becomes larger.
Taking into account the above, it can be concluded that with the help of the constructed geomechanical model and the point stress analysis, with the further drilling of wells it is necessary to understand that the deviation of the wellbore influences on the main stress, which in turn determine the stability of the wellbore. In the case of loss of wellbore stability, the deviation angle determines the shape of the wellbore breakouts.

 
 
Figure 9 Stress concentration analysis
Choice of drilling strategy for the target horizon
The main parameters that affect the stability of the wellbore are: inclination and azimuth angles, mud density.
In the geological section of field X (Figure 5) there are three problem intervals (depths: 950 m, 1450 m, 1930 m), from the point of view of maintaining stability of the wellbore. In these intervals, the shales are presented. The interval of interest is located at a depth of 950 m, because beneath it is the target horizon, which is represented by Vereiskian sediments (target layer according to the development project). The maximum deviation angle at which shales will not break down at a depth of 950 m is approximately 20 degrees and the range of the mud window is from 1 g/cm3 to 1.55 g/cm3 (Figure 6).
 Based on the constructed geomechanical model, it is proposed to consider three possible options for drilling a well (Figure 16). 
The first option is the drilling of the vertical borehole to the bottom of the Vereiskian horizon and setting of production casing. According to the plot of the combined densities for shales in the interval 950 m (Figure 6), the deviation angles are: a minimum of 0 degrees, a maximum of 20 degrees; the range of drilling mud densities is: a minimum of 1.1 g/cm3, a maximum of 1.25 g/cm3.
 The second option is the drilling of the horizontal borehole to the top of the Vereiskian horizon and setting of intermediate production casing for isolation of the interval of unstable shales (at the depth 950 m), then drilling a horizontal borehole through the Vereiskian horizon. While according to the trajectory of the horizontal well, the deviation angle at a depth of 950 m is 50 degrees. In accordance with the mud window (Figure 6) in the interval of 950 m there will be problems with the wellbore breakouts. This problem is proposed to be solved by using special drilling fluids with various additives, and in order to minimize the negative impact of unstable shales. To select drilling fluids it is necessary to carry out laboratory tests. 
The third option of drilling is a complicated wellbore profile with a horizontal end. In this case, the borehole is drilled almost vertically (maximum deviation angle at the depth of 950 m is 20 degrees) to the bottom of unstable shales, then it begins to increase inclination angle to more than 90 degrees in order to reach the interval of the Vereiskian horizon and ends with a horizontal interval of the wellbore through the target formation. With this trajectory of the borehole, it is possible to avoid the wellbore breakouts in the interval of unstable shales at a depth of 950 m.
From the point of view of maintaining the stability of the wellbore, the first option and the third are most preferable. In order to ensure high flow rates (the possibility of multistage hydraulic fracturing) and wellbore stability, a third variant of the well trajectory is selected (Figure 10).

 
Figure 10 Trajectories of proposed wellbores

Proposal well design
Drilling of a horizontal wellbore is projected in the direction of minimal stress (Figure 11). The selected trajectory of the horizontal section corresponds to the most stable state of the wellbore when drilling (Zoback 2007). Moreover, hydraulic fractures are formed along the direction of maximum stress, therefore, all created fractures after the fracturing are oriented perpendicular to the wellbore, which corresponds to the chosen concept for stimulation of wells in the field X. 


 
Figure 11 Location of the proposed horizontal well

Sensitivity analysis
A sensitivity analysis is carried out on several parameters influencing one of the main indicators by which the stability of the wellbore is determined. As a key indicator, the required mud density to prevent wellbore breakouts (Figure 12). The analysis is performed for one point in the interval of the Vereiskian horizon. For this, nine mud density calculations are made when each of the nine parameters is changed by ten percent.

 
Figure 12 Sensitivity analysis (mud weight equivalent)
Parameters influencing the maximum on the value of the required mud density are vertical stress, pore pressure and friction angle. It should be noted that the change in the value of the mud density is directly proportional to the change in the values of the vertical stress and inversely proportional to the change in friction angle values. The least influence on the required mud density is the value of Young's modulus and azimuth of the minimum horizontal stress.	

Conclusion
In the process of implementing this project, without any additional material costs, a geomechanical model is created on the basis of available information on field X.
On the basis of the constructed geomechanical model it was revealed that one of the main parameters influencing the stability of the wellbore, while drilling in the field X, is the angle of deviation of the borehole. If the deviation angle is more than 28 degrees with loss of stability of the wellbore, the form of the breakouts will be of the elliptical shape, if the deviation angle is less than 28 degrees, then the toroidal shape is formed. 
With the help of the model, the potential for drilling horizontal wellbores is identified. Horizontal drilling is possible only on three layers: Vereiskian, Bashkirian, Fammenian.  A well design is proposed that will provide minimum risks while drilling.   
Based on the geomechanical model, the horizontal trajectory of the wellbore and the drilling parameters were proposed. 
As a result of analysis of the constructed model, it is revealed that in geological sections consisting of dense rocks, such as limestones and dolomites, the main stress in the vertical boreholes is the axial stress, which in turn affects the shape of the wellbore breakouts. 
Generally, with the help of constructed geomechanical model, there appears a representation of the state of the general stresses in the near wellbore zone, it is possible to analyze all the main parameters affecting the stressed state of the wellbore, the "behavior" of the rocks under external artificial influence becomes understandable. On the basis of the constructed geomechanical model, it is possible to predict the stability of the wellbore (preventing the collapse of the walls of the well, the absence of mud losses, avoiding a kick) prior to the drilling process, which significantly reduces the risks of problems when actually performing work.
Taking into account all the above the geomechanical model construction helps to reduce the risk of problems and reduce the significant costs of eliminating the consequences of accidents during drilling.   
 BREAKS HERE

It is particularly important to impose in an active development carbonate deposits of complex structure with reserves difficult to permanent decline in oil production from highly productive deposits both in terrigenous and carbonate reservoirs, massive reduction of growth of exploration stock and also price volatility in oil. The one of such project prospect is Tournai stage associated with carbonate reservoirs in which it is concentrated approximately 40% of field raining oil in place in Bashkortostan.
Although there are considerable reserves of this project size (22% initial oil in place). Depletion of reserves is on the average a maximum of 30% from initial recoverable reserves of oil. The hardness of oil production is connected with hardship of porous structure from carbonates of Tournai stage, high viscosity, poor effectiveness of reserve recovery when using traditional well network and water flooding pattern; they are adopted for highly productive reservoirs. It is definitely required search not only for innovative technology, tools in control and development area of such reservoirs and also upgrading of current development system in terms of more detailed but, at the same time, more intensive three dimensional geological and hydrodynamic models.
There are development documents, they have been restricted oil field development based on 3d dimensional digital model in Russia for many years. However the quality of most digital models is prevented to characterize a reservoir with assurance and optimize field development. This case is one of the reasons for relative low oil recovery rate confined to the territory of Russian Federation. The quality of created models may be significantly improved owing to integration of cores, well log data, well tests, using of special surveys such as FMI, and also using of production log test. It has been analyzed all reference data of researches which are conducted at the Field X for construction of hydrodynamic model. as illustrated by the Field X. It will be possible to optimize this current development scheme with the purpose of advance of projected oil recovery index.

Introduction
This individual project refers to the Tournai stage of the Field X correlated with Aktanysh slope of Chishminsky deflection and it is located on the western territory of the Republic Bashkortostan. The average depth of overlap of Tournai stage is 1240m (absolute depth mark). The Field X refers to the problematic category and it is characterized by as unfavorable geological conditions for extraction. The one the most complicating factor for working process is progressing of cavernous collector zone for significant proportion of oil deposits.  They have been confined to carbonate Tournai deposits. The existence of such zones is required separate approach for study of  features of geologic structure of deposits, construction of geological and hydrodynamic models, selection effective system of development, monitoring and control the processes of oil recovery. Nowadays applied complex of methods combine into unified system, all data on core (such as oriented core), well logs, Formation Micro Imagers and also local seismic surveys allow detecting presence of caverns and fractures, and evaluating their parameters. Unfortunately, this approach is performed not in all fields for the integrated study. However, this titled complex cannot reply to all curious questions to the full extent. For more detalization it is required to involve additional methods of testing in producing well stock, such as PLT (Production Log Test) and well tests.  Currently in use research approaches of carbonate reservoir of Tournai stage has a number of disadvantages and in this regard design for research with a view to further deal with such major tasks as definition of geological and hydrodynamic model that is very important today. That is why, it is necessary to have accredited reference information for definition which means that fusion of all kinds of tests is required. 

1. GEOLOGY

1.1 General Field description

Administratively, oil and gas Field X is located in the Tatyshlinsky District of the Republic of Bashkortostan, on the border with Perm Territory. The nearest municipality is Yanaul that is situated in 90 kilometers from Field X (Figure 1).
                                             
                         Figure 1 Location of oilfield X (from Field development project)
The area of the Field X is covered by geological survey, all methods of field geophysical research.  In tectonic terms, it has been discovered subsidence in westward.
The field X was entered for deep-hole drilling in 1960. The first well X1 was drilled in roof reservoir area of Bolsheyugskoe plateau, in which an inflow of oil was obtained while testing the Devonian sand stones.

1.2 Stratigraphic geology

In the studied stratigraphic complex, the development of the Kamsko-Kinel’ system of uncompensated troughs (ÊÊUT) predetermined the existence of three main structural-facial zones (SFZ).
The KKUT in the territory of western Bashkortostan is represented mainly by Aktanysh-Chishminskaij drawdown (AChD), it extends from the north-west to the southeast.  Its foundation begins in the Domanic times, but a clear emphasizing has been observed only from the late Frasnian time.
The studied area is almost entirely in the zone of shallow-water sediments, therefore, the deposits of the Tournai stage should be considered as a basic series of sediments in the conditions of the marine transgression. The north-west of Bashkortostan underwent mainly up rise tectonic movements that led to the stating of surface conditions.  The latter was the reason for the intensive development of leaching. In the Tournai age, all the main features of the sedimentation regime of the Famennian Age were inherited.  In the territory of western Bashkortostan there was a sea basin with a strongly dissected relief of the bed.  Its develop-ment in this area was continued by AChD, which determined the nature of sedimentation and the development of the main SFZ: shelf, onboard, and depressive [5].

1.3 Tectonic geology

Tectonically, the Field X is confined to the margin part of the Bashkir arch and is represented by a group of structures of general latitudinal strike.  Taking into account the genetic history of the region, the field X is located in the reef of paleoshelf area.  It is distinguished the Upper Frasnian – Lower Famennial barrier reef (Oriebash-Maksimovo-Tatyshlinsky strip of oil-bearing biohermic missive’s) including local elevation of the Field X.  According to the section of field there has been complete structural compliance of the deposits of the Famennian, Tournai stages, terrigene mass of Lower Carbon, carbonate deposits of the Middle Carbon and their reflection in the structures of the Sakmarian stage. The amplitude of the local uplifts is maximal in the deposits of the Famenian stage, it gradually decreases in the overlying deposits, creating draping structure.

2.	ANALYSIS OF FIELD DEVELOPMENT

 	2.1 General information
The Field Õ was discovered in 1960.  The field zone is a Pribelskaya hilly-rugged plain, heavily dissected by ravine-gullies and river systems.  The field has been under development since 1969.  The main industrial-oil-bearing horizons of the Tatyshlinsky field are: terrigenous deposits of the Lower Carbon, carbonate deposits of the Middle and Lower Carbon, terrigenous deposits of the Devonian system. Deposits of the main objects of TTNK, Ctur and TTD are of the tabular-arc type, the deposits of the Sbash are of a massive type. The main objects of the deposit are shown in Figure 2. 
                                  
                                       Figure 2 Oil-bearing objects of Field 

2.2	Analysis of the current state of development 

The Tournai object of the Field X is at the second stage of development and is being developed since 1971 with the formation of the water injection system in 1998. The nine deposits were brought into the development out of 15, of them the four are brought into production without water injection system by single wells. Since 2010, production has been increased through workover actions, including: new wells -22 wells including 8 wells with multifrac with a total oil production rate of more than 42 tons per day, liquids -58 m3 / day, well re-completion to overlying formation-13 wells, acid fracturing -14 wells.  To support the well intervention and reservoir pressure, 22 wells were transferred to the well injection system with a total injection capacity of 1696.5 m3 / day from 2015 to 2016.  At the end of 2016, it has found a decline in the Pres at the object of Ctur of the field X in the recovery zone by about 15%  to the initial reservoir pressure (155 atm) at the current compensation of 189%, due to insufficient pumping efficiency (according to the calculation of the material balance, efficiency factor  is  50%) associated with the  interformational cross flow  in the wells  of the injection well stock and the location of injection wells in the marginal reservoir area.  At the same time, an analysis was made of the effect of injection on new wells, horizontal wells, including with multi-stage fracturing: 
-	there is an increase in production rates and reservoir pressure in forming water injection system, when the wells are located at a distance of 200-400 m, and when wells are at a distance of more than 450 m, there is no effect from the water injection system;
-	there is an increase in watercut in the wells with multi fracturing associated with excess of compensation by more than 200%, with a distance of 250-400m, which leads to breakthrough of water along the hydraulic fractures.
Dynamics of reservoir pressure and injection compensation are shown in Figure 3 Appendix 1.
                                                 
The deposits are characterized by the following indicators:
-	The current average production rate for directional wells is 4.7 tons / day;
-	Current average production rate for horizontal wells -12.1 t / day;  
-	Starting production for directional wells is 10t / day;  
-	Starting production for horizontal wells -55t / day;  
-	Average water cut is 20%.
The reason for increase of input parameters is related to the introduction of horizontal wells into the development due to the increasing of drainage area compared with the directional wells.  Horizontal wells are effective for the development of carbonate reservoirs of the Field X and are proposed for further implementation.  It is also worth mentioning the high efficiency of input of horizontal wells with multi-stage fracturing.  By 01.07.2017, 21 hori-zontal wells have been drilled in the Field X, including seven wells with multi-stage fracturing.  
                                       
2.3 Analysis of recovery of reserves
In order to estimation of production of reserves, the main objects of the Field X were considered without infill well (Figure 4 Appendix 1).  Generally, all the areas under consideration are characterized by low production of reserves, but zones 2, 4 are of the greatest interest.  According to these sections, displacement characteristics were constructed (Figure 5 Appendix 1), of which the following should be noted:
-	production by objects is not more than 11% of the initial oil in place;  
-	 there is a premature water breakthrough in comparison with the trend characteristic for the field as a whole; 
-	 it is required to revise the system of water injection system to increase the efficiency of field development;
-	 the current development system is inefficient in terms of achieving the project oil recovery efficiency;
-	 optimization with computer simulation is required taking into account all the characteristics of the Field X of carbonate reservoirs.


2.3	The development strategy of the field

In order to further develop the field, the following are proposed for the two objects of the Field X: 
1) drilling of horizontal wells;  
2) drilling of injection wells, transferring low-profit producing wells into injection wells;  
3) conducting acid fracturing;  
4) creation of a geological and hydrodynamic model for increasing the efficiency of field development according to the available information and new data obtained from the pilot well bore; 
 5) based on the model:
 - optimal location and well path;  
- specification of the production conditions of injection and production wells;
- application of effective technologies for intensification and injection control.
To calculate the measures of point 5, it is necessary to have a detailed geological and hydrodynamic model [6]. Uncertainties in the construction of the model cause incorrect technological solutions, which in the process is expressed in the difference between the design and actual indicators (the cruder the model the more the divergence),   losses that are not comparable to the total costs for design work, i.å.  the price of the error is extremely high.
Thus, the following scheme for a more detailed construction of the geological and hydrodynamic model is offered, which includes both the initial information and the final result [7]. Figure 6 Appendix 1 presents an idealized scheme for construction of geological and hydrodynamic model.
                                  

3 ANALYSIS OF CORE DATA

Petro types were estimated from a prevailing type of voids according to core data. Thus, the studied sediments can be divided into the following groups: 
1.	microporous low-shale content limestone;
2.	fractured chert-bearing limestone;
3.	lumpy limestone with porous and cavernous porous types of voids;
4.	lumpy bioclastic limestone with integranular type of voids, partially cavernous. 
Figure 7 Appendix 2 demonstrates core description from the well 51608 of Field X.
The segregation by types of voids was refined by wells with a large sample of reservoir quality measurements confirmed by thin sections (a total of 134 samples).  Types of voids Tournai stage are grouped into autonomous trends.                  
The isolated micropore type has a sufficiently high porosity at low permeability values.  The pore type of the potential reservoir has approximately the same porosity at higher permeability values.  The greatest values of flow properties are characteristic of samples with a cavernous-porous type of voids.  It should be noted that compact lumpy limestone with progressing of fracturing are not covered by reservoir quality measurements.  In view of the shortness of such deposits and their exposure to brittleness and fissuring, drilling of such samples is difficult.  As noted earlier, microporous type is characterized by high values of porosity with low values of permeability according to porosity and permeability histograms.

3.1 Classification of petro type for Tournai stage of Field X 
On the Field X were determined several petro types in accordance with petrophysical zoning for carbonate reservoir of Tournai stage. This work was conducted using of data of lithofacial zoning [5]. Every type has own relationships. These relationships can be used for solving of many tasks which includes reservoir characterization and construction of hydrodynamic models.  Given classification is presented on the Table 1 Appendix 2.
                                            
3.2 Analysis of core data

It can be noted that Field X has low sweep core sampling and there is practically no core sampling on the main area of potential productive reservoir. Permeability and porosity were determined using results of core data analysis. Figure 8 Appendix 2 demonstrates relationship between porosity and permeability according to all data. Two trends can be distinguished: I+II petro-type and III petro-type. Single points for 0 petro-type were not taken into account due to of their insignificance. It can be noted that fracturing is detected and fracturing has a local character on the Field X. Further, core recovery was performed. Histogram of core recovery was constructed, according to which the average core recovery is 52%. This fact is feature of heterogeneity of pore space and presence of secondary pore space in terms of vugs and fractures.
                                                       
So to sum up: 
- low sweep of core sampling;
- average core recovery ~ 52%;
- vertical heterogeneity;
- fracturing is not widespread due to its locality;
- carbonate reservoir of Tournai stage Field X is characterized by porous and cavernous porous types.



4 ANALYSIS OF CONDUCTED WELL LOGS

The analysis of well logs was performed using of all available materials from wells of Field X. On the Table 2 Appendix 3 are shown well logs which were conducted on the wells of Field X. Generalized surveys were conducted along the entire length of the wellbore which include: Caliper, SP, normal log, GR, NGK, resistivity logs. RHOB was conducted in single wells. Acoustic logs were partially performed on the Field X.
Productive carbonate deposits are presented by the following lithological varieties: argillaceous and carbonate reservoirs.  Carbonate rocks are characterized by alternating of compacted and consolidated impermeable beds; permeable reservoir formations, pelitomorphic interbeds. Lithology differentiation was performed according to series of well logs with using of essential reservoir attributes. Argillaceous rocks are characterized by high values of PS, GR, DTp; minimal values of apparent resistivity, NGK; nominal or increased diameter of wells. Compacted rocks have sharply different character of well log: maximum values of apparent resistivity and NGK; minimal values of GR and DTp; nominal diameter of well; very low values of porosity (is lower than limit values). Productive intervals of reservoir are characterized by reducing of values of NGK and resistivity logs; improvement of values DTp. Traditionally, essential reservoir attributes are used for determination of pore structure in carbonate reservoir, but in the case of reduced number of well logs – quantitative criterion such as limit value of porosity. 
Porosity was estimated by using of two marker beds. In the capacity of marker beds for Tournay stage uses compacted limestone of Alexinsky bed with Iíãê_max, w = 3 % and argillite of Tulian bed with Iíãê min w=25-35 % depending on washing-out. Figure 9 Appendix 3 shows interpretation of conducted well logs on the well 51608 using PRIME. It can be noted that porosity determined by using NGK has good convergence with value of porosity according to analysis of core data.                        
The well 51608 was chosen in order to determine dominant type of voids of interval of interest by cross-plot of V.M. Dobrynin. Obtained results were tested with description of voids obtained by analysis of core data and well logs data. Relationship of elastic wave interval transit time with open porosity is shown Figure 10 Appendix 3. It is possible to highlight zones characterized the relationship parameters for reservoirs with different types: fractured, porous fractured, porous, cavernous and cavernous porous.  Using distribution of parameters such as DTp and phiopen it may be concluded that:
- maximum deviation DTp from average value of DTp for typical porous reservoirs;
- the larger portion of cavernous components – the greater the divergence with porous curve.
Moreover, other cross-plot of V.M. Dobrynin was tested in this project without using data of core. The point of this cross-plot is that secondary porosity is not determined by acoustic log, but this can be performed using NGK which determines total porosity (first porosity +secondary porosity). However, data of NGK and density log were applied instead of only data of NGK. Many researches confirmed that combination of density log and NGK permits to indicate limestone and carbonates. If scale of logs is chosen correctly then curve of RHOB will coincide with curve of NGK in intervals with limestone, but these curves will diverge in intervals of dolomites [3].                                
Using of this cross-plot it was confirmed that the well has cavernous porous type of voids. Thus, using of V.M. Dobrynin’s cross-plots on the wells with lithological description showed that methods of comparing DTp with open porosity may be recommended for definition of structure of pore voids of carbonate reservoirs.  
	Porosity of reservoir with complex structure of voids and complex mineral composition can be estimate by following coupled equations [10]:

                                
where Vlms, Vdol, Vsh - limestone, dolomite, shale volumes
Solving this system can be calculated the total porosity in the case of qualitative data of well logs. These equations show how commonly used minerals affect the porosity determined using of series of well logs. General solution of this system of equations from which can be estimated values of total porosity, volumes of different components of carbonate rocks are shown below.
 

In summary, using determined petro-type can be estimated values of permeability according to relationship between porosity and permeability for obtained petro-type. Further, it is necessary to compare the obtained values with the core data. 

Determination of oil saturation of carbonate reservoirs 
Based on the available core data, several methods can be used to determine the oil saturation c of carbonate reservoir of the Field X: 
– standard approach (Archie-Dakhnov method) with data of resistivity logs using: 
FF = f (phi) è RI = f (phi); 
- using relationship Sw= f (phi) (balancing of porosity method) for emergency saturation zone.

Archie-Dakhnov method
Relationship for estimation of the oil saturation of carbonate reservoir of Tournai stage has the following analytical form for the cavernous porous:
I+II petro-type:  FF = phi-1.955 and   RI =Sw-1.72    

In sum, a block diagram of the interpretation core data and well logs is proposed. This block diagram is shown on the Figure 11 Appendix 3.    
                                      
5 ANALYSIS OF WELL TESTS
At the stage of transition from a geological model to a hydrodynamic model, a great deal of attention is given to the results of well tests.  In particular, the 3D distribution of permeability is built on the basis of basic Well tests, taking into account Well Logs and core that is the correctness of the well tests data.  This is reflected in the results of the definition of the geological and hydrodynamic model, in the design of development and on the effectiveness of control over the development of the field.  The main purpose of the well tests is to determine the reservoir properties in the well drainage area [11].  Carrying out a well test at unsteady conditions allows diagnosing the reservoir model, the formation boundaries model, the completion model of the well.  It should be noted that without a quantitative assessment of effective thicknesses from the data of production log tests and core data, adequate permeability assessment is not possible.
The review of the researches showed their low quality, which implies a low integrity of the results obtained.  Permeability according to the results of well tests was obtained from single wells, for all the rest, the data were obtained analytically with a large margin of error.  But, nevertheless, the trend towards an increase in comparison with the data of the "core-well logs" suggests a different scale of research: from the matrix permeability of the reservoir, which is estimated from the core and well log  data to integral permeability according to the well test data, characterizing the matrix and "secondary" part  generally.  There is a low coverage of studies for the possibility of creation a mobility map, to which, as previously mentioned, the reservoir quality were identified with a large margin of error.
The main criteria influencing the failure of surveys may be noted the following:
 - low duration of tests; 
 - procedural violation of surveys.  
According to the interpreted studies, diagnostic plots in logarithmic coordinates in the SAPHIR software complex failed to reveal the features of a model with a double porosity characteristic of the classical theory of the interpretation of carbonate reservoirs (cavernous-fractured).  The diagnostic plots presented in Figure 12 Appendix 4 show the presence of wellbore storage effect hiding the initial radial flow regime and the traced transient regime that is characteristic feature for most curves.
Initially, according to theory, a conceptual reservoir model was agreed upon with the Warren-Ruth model (a cavernous-fractured reservoir model). The rock volume is represented by the matrix and cavern-fracture components, to describe each component, the classical reservoir characteristics are used, and a parameter describing the interaction of the matrix and fractures is introduced. So, the fluid flow occurs from the matrix block into adjacent fractures, and then into other blocks along the fractures.  But not a single BU test allowed to confirm this concept.  In the carbonate reservoirs under consideration, pronounced fracturing is not observed with sustained and obvious fractures.  There is only so-called micro-fracturing, which is a network of small fractures and caverns, often cemented and not conducting.  Fractures can be grouped together into small clusters, or be completely isolated, and fracture clusters are usually isolated from each other.  In other words, in some zones of the reservoir there are systems of high-conductive fractures and caverns, in other zones of the formation fractures and caverns are absent or they are non-conductive. Factors that are affected the change in the conceptual view of the formation: 
1) sharp drop in the flow rate of liquid and, accordingly, of oil;  
2) reservoir pressure falling;  
3) analysis of pressure buildup curve, that lately,  characterize  the reducing  of filtration  properties:
 4) input of the water injection system.
                                        
Thus, the fact that liquid rates fall three times or more within a year indicate that the presented cavernousness and microfracturing, among other things, are not described by the classic model of Warren Ruth.  In reservoirs with developed macro-fracture, rapid breakthroughs of water from injection wells are expected, whereas in fact a smooth increase in water cut is observed.  The main difference between microcfractures and macro-fracture is the size and distribution of fractures.  Macrofractures include cracks with a large opening and a considerable length, whereas macrofractures are fractures with limited length and openning.  Often, macrofractures form a continuous network that is hydrodynamically very similar to a porous medium [14].  According to the new conceptual model, when the well is started up, after the acid treatment, the caverns with macrofractures are integrated into a single system and operate with their initial permeability, ensuring high input rates.  After the cavernous-fractures system has been developed and, accordingly, the pressure decreases in the well area, the permeability of the caverns falls and then they cease to work, but the fluid influx is ensured into the well by a low permeable matrix.  This confirmation is also facilitated by the fact that after repeated acid treatment, the production rate again increases with its further decrease.  That is, due to the repeated acid treatment, the channels from the formation to the well opened, then failed   and again a low permeable matrix was connected to the filtration.
Determination of the local distribution of the reservoir quality
 	In order to identify the local distribution zones of the reservoir quality in the Field X, all the surveys carried out on the producing, injection well stock.  At the field X, in addition to BU test, such tests as level build-up curve and pressure falloff tests are conducted in order to clarify reservoir pressure, assess the current reservoir quality formation.  Unfortunately, on the whole, the quality statistics of the performed research shows the low success of the performed studies on the evaluation of the reservoir quality, but reservoir pressure and PI nevertheless were estimated by the differential method in 80% of cases.  It is clear that the error in the reliability of the obtained results exceeds 5-10% and it is unacceptable to apply the obtained data in calculations that require reliable initial information with an error of less than 5%.  However, to evaluate the zones with different productivity in the field, it may be used these results.  As new well studies are received, it is possible to refine the local distribution zones of the reservoir quality.  According to the histogram of the distribution of the productivity factor, zonal heterogeneity of productivity by area is noted and indirectly confirms the presence of cavernousness.  The general trend is that the productivity of the wells is rather chaotic, which may also be due to undeveloped cavernousness.  Thus, all well tests of the wells were analyzed.  According to their data, the conceptual model of the reservoir is specified.  Indirectly confirmed the presence of cavernousness and zonal heterogeneity of reservoir properties over the area of the deposit.  In order to improve the quality of the conducted hydrodynamic studies, it is recommended:
1) conduct BU tests with overlapping of the borehole section;  
2) conduct long-term surveys using online monitoring to assess the degree of build-up pressure;  
3) conduct a qualitative measurement of the flow rate of the liquid; 
 4) use high-precision gauges for measuring pressure and temperature with high resolution in pressure;  
5) do not allow the bottomhole pressure to drop below the bubble point pressure;
6) suggested complex of well tests.
 
6 DESIGN for the conduction of the complex of surveys at the Field X

1	Types of research 

1.Core sampling and core analyses
 Geological and hydrodynamic simulation begins with core description in order to collect the main geological data that will form the basis of the geological-petrophysical model.  Only core description may serve as a source of information on vertical facies sequences.  Clarification of the reservoir properties, type determination of pore volume is the main purpose of core sampling.  
2.Well logs
The next most important step is to link the structure-textual data or the petrophysical type with the Log data.  The reliability of this leveling will depend on the quality and type of available well logs data.  The basic complex of well logs includes such types as GR, NGK, RHOB and Acoustic log; several types of resistivity logs and CALI are able to provide the necessary reliability of correlation between core and log data.
3.FMI, DSI, NML
There are study of the reservoir type, assessment of the presence of fracture network, clarification of their qualities and rock mechanical properties of the reservoir.  
4.Results of the production log tests.
 In addition to the well logs data, the interpretation results of the PLT for the purpose of determining the fluid movement profiles were considered as an additional source of information for understanding the filter mechanisms in the borehole zones of the studied field.  Determination of the working effective intervals of reservoir.  Identification of cavernous / fissured intervals.  
5.BU tests registering.
 The primary targets of well tests: the evaluation of reservoir pressure, quality and their dynamic pattern, evaluation of vertical and lateral connectivity of reservoirs, conceptual modeling of secondary porosity.
6.The registering of IPR curve.
Productivity evaluation is dependent on depression.  
7.BU tests and IPR curve registering.
Evaluation of reservoir properties, reservoir pressure, productivity index, the state of 
 formations pay zone the conceptual simulation of secondary porosity.  
8. Well interference testing. 
 Evaluation of the vertical and lateral reservoir connectivity.  Stating geological heterogeneity and disturbances in the interwell space.

2.	Construction of geological and hydrodynamic model

Further, based on the obtained data (type definition of reservoir bed, distribution of reservoir properties and petrophysical properties of rocks), is constructed a geological model of the field development followed by construction of a hydrodynamic model.  On the basis of the hydrodynamic model, various development options are calculated with a set of different parameters such as the length of the horizontal part of the well, the wells locations in accordance with the distribution of kh in the maximum direction, placement of injection wells relative to oil, fracturing treatment, number of stages, etc.  The ultimate purpose of construction of the hydrodynamic model of the deposit is to obtain the project oil recovery factor, obtain the maximum profit.

RESULTS

	In this project, the core data, all types of well logs, well tests were analyzed. 
The results of the analysis revealed the following: 
1) Low core coverage. 
2) Core recovery does not exceed 55%, which indirectly confirms the presence of caverns / fractures.
3) Major logs such as GR, NGK were carried out practically on the entire well stock.
4) RHOB was carried out in single wells; 
5) Acoustic logs performed partially - coverage of studies by no more than 25% of the total number of surveys conducted.
6) Special log such as FMI is not conducted in any well. 
7) By Production Log Test, it has been observed poor quality and quantity of research.  These studies were carried out during the operational period of the well workover, which implies low fluid rates before the study, which explains the absence of separate inflow intervals (when the flow rate is less than 10 m3 / day, it is not possible to evaluate the inflow intervals).  
8) Poor quality of well tests is noted.  The main reason for the failure is the inadequate duration of the study and the violation of research technology. 
9) The character of the diagnostic plots analyzed does not reveal signs of double porosity according to the classic model of Warren Root.  
10) The trend of almost all diagnostic plots is the same.  
11) Also studies were analyzed on the active stock such as level build-up curve, pressure falloff tests.  According to these types of research, low quality is also noted. Basically, the data of the study were interpreted by the differential method; the results of this interpretation are formation pressure, productivity index.  
12) Reservoir property distribution maps were constructed and a histogram of well productivity distribution was built. 
13) In order to divide the carbonate reservoirs into the pore volume structure, Dobrynin’s cross-plots were applied at the field X wells in order to confirm the petrotype estimated by the limit values of the permeability and porosity according to the core data.  
14) A three dimensional reservoir model was constructed using the log equation  system, and  was evaluated total  porosity based on.  
14) Based on the analysis of the Well Tests, a conceptual reservoir model was proposed that differs from the classic reservoir model for the fractured reservoirs of Warren Root.  A complex of Well Tests for the investigation of wells of the carbonate field X is proposed.    15) Based on the analysis of available information on the studies conducted at the  field X wells, a design is proposed for the complex of studies that includes not only core sampling, Well logging, Well Testing, seismic and also  special logging as FMI.

DISCUSSION 

Today, improved field development is not possible without the use of digital simulation, which will reliably describe the reservoir and optimize the development of the field. This approach is used in all major oil companies in Russia. Based on them, procedures are taken to improve the efficiency of development and achievement of all the performance targets.
It is known that reservoirs with a complex structure of voidspace are not described by traditional methods and require specialized approaches to study and modeling. Methods for the description of reservoirs of cavernous-fractured-porous type are widely known in foreign companies and these methods are actively used in the development. In the Russian Federation, simulation methods are used for terrigenous reservoirs due to the predominance in the oil production of reservoirs with terrigenous reservoirs. Carbonate reservoirs are characterized by a massive type according to the specific lithological and physical properties of these rocks. It is necessary to apply special techniques and approaches for the study, evaluation of parameters and simulation of carbonate reservoir [10]. Moreover, as Narr [11] writes, there are no single algorithms for studying and development of such complex reservoirs. Each carbonate reservoir must have its own algorithm. 
With the introduction of various new technologies, high-precision measuring instruments and the corresponding software, it is possible to solve particularly complex problems regarding the development of the field.  The quality of the created models can be significantly improved due to the wider application of well research results in the simulation.  Therefore, without carrying out complex studies it is not possible to build a model qualitatively and solve problems based on it.
According to the analysis of the best practices in the development of carbonate reservoirs, a design was suggested for carrying out a complex of studies at the field X, which will help achieve the set tasks, that is, to obtain maximum profit, the value of the project oil recovery factor.  Due to the fact that it is actively involved in the development of such complex reservoirs as carbonate reservoirs, this iterative approach will make it possible to effectively develop deposits from the first days of life.  Without the complexity of various types of surveys, the development of the field will be ineffective with a relatively low oil recovery factor.  Diverse studies should have points of contact with each other and complement each other.
Thus, a comprehensive approach to the analysis and modeling of secondary voidness will provide the most reliable representation of the behavior of the system.  This all will make it possible to rationally approach the development of carbonate reservoirs, optimize the well network, and also increase the predictive capacity of hydrodynamic models.

CONCLUSION

In the course of the work done, the approach to studying the carbonate reservoir on the basis of a complex of various studies was considered using the example of the field X.  The cavernous reservoir type for the Carbonate Tournai Stage of oilfield has a significant impact on well productivity.  Carrying out well logs of wells and studying the core data do not allow to fully estimate the presence of a microfracturing of reservoir and to determine their numerical characteristics, especially in conditions of low illumination by core material.  The most informative as a study of cavernosity / fracturing is well tests by the pressure build-up tests and analysis of production data.
All the actual material on the studies, such as core, well logs, well tests are analyzed.  In general, it is worth mentioning that there are the low coverage of research and the lack of application of some types of research.  Despite the poor quality of well tests, analysis of these studies allows to establish a static model of secondary porosity.  Dobrynin's method for estimating the type of voids was considered and successfully tested at the wells of this field.  This technique shows a good convergence with the data obtained from petrophysical zoning cross-plots.  An integrated approach is proposed for conducting a complex of multidirectional tasks, as well as their comparison with each other for correcting and supplementing the missing information.  Further, the obtained data can be effectively used in the analysis of the field development, including in the performance of geological and hydrodynamic simulation.
          

 SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER WORK

For further work, the introduction of this algorithm of surveys is proposed. As information is received, it is necessary to build sector models for consideration individual deposits in terms of increasing the efficiency of the field.  Interpreted seismic data (at the time of writing, the materials were not interpreted) can be used to predict the confirmation of geological bodies, lithology and porosity in the inter-well space to help construct the most reliable geological and hydrodynamic model.  In the future, according to seismic and image logging data, it is necessary to identify or confirm the absence of macrofractures and faults.  If they are available: 
1) to characterize the orientation of natural fractures and faults;  
2) correction of the algorithm for definition a geological and hydrodynamic model - inclusion of a network model of fractures;
 3) construction of a geomechanical model for the first-priority sectors of drilling, methods of simulating production (formation hydraulic fracturing).?
 BREAKS HERE
The main purpose of this paper is to determine the influence of geological and petrophysical uncertainties on the accuracy of reservoir simulation model calculations. 
Several geological and reservoir simulation models were constructed, sensitivity analysis was conducted.
Firstly, it was determined that change in relative permeability curves has the highest influence on the divergence of reservoir performance results (FWCT, FOPR, FWPR) from historical value. The change in porosity and permeability has the highest impact on the divergence of field reservoir pressure from historical value.
Secondly, equations were created that can predict divergence of cumulative oil production in the case of imperfect history matching of the some parameter.
After that, the obtained equations were applied to real reservoir simulation model of field X.

Introduction
The term “uncertainty” that is the main part during field development can be defined as incomplete understanding about what we like to quantify (1). Due to presence of uncertainties field development and reservoir management decisions are often related to risks. The worst case occurs during appraisal stage that corresponds to the highest capital expenditures, such as drilling the wells or facility construction, but at the same time is related to minimal data about reservoir characterization due to small amount of core or PTA data. 
The most common uncertainties are related to construction of geological model. They are volume in place, presence of faults, transmissibility of faults, reservoir boundaries, aquifer support and others. 
Nowadays, there is no unique methodology that can quantify degree of uncertainties.  Moreover, existing methodologies to quantify the impact of uncertainties are often not well defined because the impact of uncertainties and amount of available data varies with time. 
The all input data for geological or reservoir simulation models such as lithology, porosity, permeability and others have some degree of uncertainty that occurs due to different reasons (2). These causes of occurrence can be classified on:
1.	Character of measurement:
•	Direct method (e. g. fluid movement profile. These measurements seem to be more reliable but there are possible uncertainties that are needed to take into account during construction of reservoir simulation model and history matching, for example:
?	Oil, water production rates are measured systematically whereas gas solubility is measured more rarely. It leads to uncertainty during matching of gas production rate.
?	Injection rates can be less reliable than production rates due to presence of measurement inaccuracy such as inaccuracy of flow meters or behind-the-casing flow.)
•	Indirect method (e. g. PTA, well logging, seismic surveys)
2.	Depth of investigation:
•	Shallow (core analysis. These data represent only small part of field.)
•	Medium (well logging)
•	Deep (PTA)
•	Very deep (seismic surveys)
3.	Degree of vertical resolution:
•	Pure (seismic surveys)
•	Medium (PTA)
•	Good (core analysis, well logging)
4.	Character of uncertainty occurrence:
•	Measurement errors (including inaccuracy of measurement gauge and incorrect technology execution. For example, data, such as permeability or productivity index, from PTA sometimes are inaccuracy due to insufficient test time. Also, during test of large perforation interval of heterogeneous reservoir it is impossible to differentiate saturation from different layers. As for the core data, they cannot be completely representative since core properties change during extraction into surface.)
•	Error during the application in models (including low correlation coefficients, averaging of data. For example, there is inaccuracy in determination of absolute and relative permeability’s in the case of naturally fractured reservoir because it is often impossible to indicate natural fractures in core. Also, there may be insufficient amount of logging tolls that leads to: 
?	incorrect determination of net pay due to absence of micrologs that can identify thin tight layers   
?	incorrect porosity determination due to absence of sonic, density or neutron tool).
Uncertainty of input data can significantly influence project parameters, such as cumulative oil, gas, water production, recovery factor, net present value and others. One of the main methods of uncertainty reduction and increase in accuracy of reservoir performance results is history matching. It is the process of adjusting the simulator input in such a way as to achieve a better fit to the actual reservoir performance (3). 
During history matching it is necessary to note that all reservoir simulation model changes should most closely reflect change in the knowledge of the field geology e.g. the permeability of a high permeable streak, the presence of sealing faults etc.
Adjusted simulation model parameters can be divided on the 3 types:
1.	Hard data (e.g. properties of rock, such as rock compressibility or fluid properties, such as fluid density and viscosity)
2.	Soft data (e.g. volume of shale, porosity distribution)
3.	Unknown data (e.g. pore volume, permeability distribution, aquifer properties, end points of relative permeability curves, fluid contacts and others). 
Performing history matching primarily it is necessary to adjust change parameters having the highest degree of uncertainty, in particular unknown data. In the case of pure history matching soft data and finally hard data are adjusted.
There are other methods to decrease degree of uncertainties and its impact on performance results of reservoir simulation model. One of these is described in SPE article 66399 that is called “Uncertainty analysis in reservoir production forecasts during appraisal and pilot production phases” (4).
The purpose of this article is to present methodology that can be used to quantify impact of uncertainties in the economic evaluation of reservoirs.
The other method of uncertainties treatment is to use standard deviation between some performance results of reservoir simulation model (e. g. water cut or reservoir pressure) in order to determine input data that have the highest impact on performance results. This method was applied in the OOO “TymenNIIgiprogas” (5).
	 
Methodology
The main purposes of this article are the following:
1.	Determination of the input parameters that have the greatest effect on the divergence of control parameters of the reservoir simulation model;
2. 	Determination of the influence of the divergence between the reservoir performance results on the cumulative oil production of reservoir simulation model.
Each depositional environment has its own individual uncertainty parameters. For example, sand deposits (lenses) of fluvial depositional environment are characterized by high dissociation (6). Consequently, the connectivity of sand lenses is the main uncertainty during geological modeling. Another example is the shallow marine depositional environment. In this case, the barrier islands are sandy bodies elongated along the shoreline. For such reservoir geometry, the width of the sand body is the most uncertain parameter.
In this article, the deltaic environment viz fluvial dominated delta was used in geological modeling. This depositional environment was used since the formation of the field X reservoir occurred under the given conditions. Fluvial dominated delta is characterized by rapid progradation towards the sea basin with the formation of "bar-fingers sands". An example of a modern fluvial dominated delta is the delta of the Mahakam River, located on the territory of the island of Kalimantan, Indonesia (7). 
To model "bar finger sands" and distribute lithology and porosity in the geological model, the ranges presented in Table 1 were taken, assuming that the ratio between the width and length of the sand body is 1: 2 (8).

Table 1 – Ranges for properties distribution   
	Case 1	Case 2	Case 3
Major range, m	1220	2135	3050
Minor range, m	610	1068	1525
Vertical range, m	7	7	7

The permeability distribution was performed by means of permeability- porosity correlationship. To distribute water saturation J-Leverett function was used. Having constructed the geological model, the STOOIP were calculated. Table 2 shows the main properties of the constructed model:

Table 2 – Geological model parameters 
Total grid size	16000
Geological model size
•	length, m
•	width, m
•	thickness, m	
•	2000
•	2000
•	40
Bulk volume, 106 m3	160
Pore volume, 106 m3	22.352
Average porosity, %	13.97
Average permeability, mD	53.7
Average water saturation, %	34
STOIIP, 106 ì3	8.382

The next step was to build reservoir simulation model and calculate the basic development variant. As a development system, a 5-point well pattern was chosen, which is the most common during the development of oil and gas fields since it has the most intensive impact on the reservoir (9).
The field development period was determined by the following conditions:
1. Watercut of production wells is 98%;
2. The oil production rate is 0.5 t/day (10).
When at least one condition was reached, the production well will shut-in. Calculation of the reservoir simulation model was performed in the software package Petrel, Eclipse.
Table 3 and Fig. 1 show the development parameters of the basic model.

Table 3 – Development parameters of base case  
Development period, years	28
Cumulative oil production, m3	5048068.5
Cumulative liquid production, m3	45953552.5

  
Fig. 1 – Development parameters of base case

The next step of this article is the construction of numerous geological and reservoir simulation models with input parameters different from the basic model. This step was performed in order to determine the impact of input parameters change on reservoir performance results of reservoir simulation model. The range of input parameters that have undergone a change is shown in Table 4.

Table 4 – The range of input parameters 
Parameter name
(symbol)	Parameter value
Sand body size (length/width/thickness)	1220/610/7
(rangemin)	2135/1068/7
(rangeav)	3050/1525/7
(rangemax)
OWC level, m	-2640
(OWCmax)	-2635
(OWCav)	-2630
(OWCmin)
Porosity, unit fraction	0.131
(Omin)	0.184
(Oav)	0.213
(Omax)
Permeability, mD	10.51
(kmin)	21.02
(kav)	91.1
(kmax)
Vertical anisotropy, unit fraction	0.1
(kv/khmax)	0.22
(kv/khav)	0.3
(kv/khmin)
Relative permeability curves	krow1	krow2	krow3
PVT data	PVT1	PVT2	PVT3

These parameters were chosen since they are the most often used during analyzing the behavior of a model and adjusting it to historical data (11). After calculation of reservoir simulation models, the sensitivity analysis for STOOIP, Np, oil recovery factor and net present value was performed. The results of the analysis are shown in Fig. 2. The sensitivity analysis showed that the parameters most influencing the accumulated indicators are: 
1.	Porosity
2.	Permeability
3.	Relative permeability curves
4.	OWC level
5.	kv/kh

  
a)			 				b)
  
c) 							d)
Fig. 2 – Sensitivity analysis: a – STOIIP; b – cumulative production; c – oil recovery efficiency; d – NPV.

Next, it was necessary to determine which parameters change most influences the discrepancy between the control parameters of the reservoir simulation model with the modified input parameters and the reservoir simulation model with basic input parameters.
For comparison, the following control parameters were selected:
1.	Watercut curve (FWCT)
2.	Reservoir pressure curve (FPR)
3.	Oil production rate curve (FOPR)
4.	Water production rate curve (FWIR)
The comparison was made based on the calculation of the standard deviation between curve of the base model and curve of model with changed input parameter. Conclusion of this comparison is presented in the chapter ''Results''.  
As mentioned earlier, the second task of this project is to determine the influence of divergence between the reservoir performance results on the accumulated indices of reservoir simulation model. The cumulative oil production was taken as an accumulated indicator, which is the most important parameter during the development of oil and gas fields since it determines oil recovery factor.
Comparison of the cumulative oil production was carried out 3, 10, 25 years from the moment of the beginning of field development in order to estimate the change of this parameter in the short, medium and long term. In order to take into account the degree of influence of the divergence between the reservoir performance results on the cumulative oil production, the calculation of the deviation between the two curves was made after 1, 2, 3 years from the start of field development. Conclusion of this comparison is presented in the chapter ''Results''
After determining the equations that make it possible to predict the divergence of cumulative oil production after 3, 10, 25 years from the beginning of field development, depending on the percentage of divergence between the reservoir performance results of the reservoir simulation model, it is necessary to verify reliability of these equations on the reservoir simulation model of a real field X.
Field X development implies the use of horizontal producers and vertical injectors. Field X development started in 2005 year. At the moment, the average water cut in the field X is 76%. Water injection to maintain reservoir pressure began six months after the start of the development.
To check the obtained equations, the following reservoir performance results were considered: 
•	Watercut curve (FWCT)
•	Oil production rate curve (FOPR) 
•	Water production curve (FWIR)
In the case of field reservoir pressure curve (FPR) it is impossible to verify the equations for this parameter, since historical data of reservoir pressure are absent.
Having analyzed the results of reservoir simulation model and the historical data, it is possible to note a significant divergence between them. This divergence exceeds the permissible deviations (12). For the last calculated period of time, the divergence between the cumulative oil productions is 19.5%. The greatest difference is noted in the watercut curves – 23%. The smallest difference is noted in water injection curves, with a difference of 6% (Fig. 3).
  
   
a)	                                                  b) 			               	c)
Fig. 3 – Comparison of historic and simulation data: à – watercut; b – water production rate; c –oil production rate

 
Check of the obtained equations was carried out as follows:
1.	Calculation of percentage of deviation of calculated value from historical value for each control parameter (FWCT, FOPR, FWPR) for each month;
2.	Calculation of the arithmetic mean of the deviations for the period of 1, 2, 3 years from the time of the development;
3.	Calculation of the percentage of divergence between cumulative oil production after 3, 10, 25 years from start of field development by means of the obtained equations (Fig. 4-15);
4.	Comparison of the calculated percentage of the difference between the cumulative oil production and the historical difference between cumulative oil production.
Conclusion of this comparison is presented in the chapter ''Results''. 
 
Results
The results of sensitivity analysis using standard deviation showed that, in most cases, a change of relative permeability curves leads to the greatest divergence between the reservoir performance results of the base model and the model with changed input parameters. The divergence of the formation pressure curves is most affected by changes in porosity and permeability, which are part of the hydraulic diffusivity (App. A, Fig. A1 - A4).
Consequently, during history matching of a reservoir simulation model, it is necessary first of all to change the relative permeability curves in order to achieve better convergence of the results of reservoir simulation model and historical data. As for the pore volume, it needs to be changed as a last resort, as change in the pore volume leads to a change in STOIIP.
Results of the second purpose of the project are the obtained equations that can predict divergence of cumulative oil production in the case of imperfect history matching. They are presented in Fig. 4-15 (a – divergence of cumulative oil production after 3 years from the beginning of field development; b – divergence of cumulative oil production after 10 years from the beginning of field development; c - divergence of cumulative oil production after 25 years from the beginning of field development).
The majority of crossplots show that correlation coefficient is larger than 0.8. It indicates the reliability of the use of the equations obtained.
A comparison over the years showed that the parameter most affected by the divergence in the cumulative oil production is the reservoir pressure. Therefore, history matching of this parameter must be done primarily. In contrast, parameter which change has the least influence on the cumulative oil production divergence over the year is water production rate.

 
   
à) 				b) 				c)
Fig. 4 – Dependence of the cumulative production divergence on the discrepancy between the water cut curves after 1 year from the beginning of field development

   
à) 				b) 				c)
Fig. 5 – Dependence of the cumulative production divergence on the discrepancy between the water cut curves after 2 years from the beginning of field development

   
à) 				b) 				c)
Fig. 6 – Dependence of the cumulative production divergence on the discrepancy between the water cut curves after 3 years from the beginning of field development

     
à) 				b) 				c)
Fig. 7 – Dependence of the cumulative production divergence on the discrepancy between the oil production rate curves after 1 year from the beginning of field development
   
à) 				b) 				c)
Fig. 8 – Dependence of the cumulative production divergence on the discrepancy between the oil production rate curves after 2 years from the beginning of field development

   
à) 				b) 				c)
Fig. 9 – Dependence of the cumulative production divergence on the discrepancy between the oil production rate curves after 3 years from the beginning of field development

   
à) 				b) 				c)
Fig. 10 – Dependence of the cumulative production divergence on the discrepancy between the water production rate curves after 1 year from the beginning of field development

   
à) 				b) 				c)
Fig. 11 – Dependence of the cumulative production divergence on the discrepancy between the water production rate curves after 2 years from the beginning of field development

?


   
à) 				b) 				c)
Fig. 12 – Dependence of the cumulative production divergence on the discrepancy between the water production rate curves after 3 years from the beginning of field development

   
à) 				b) 				c)
Fig. 13 – Dependence of the cumulative production divergence on the discrepancy between the reservoir pressure curves after 1 year from the beginning of field development

   
à) 				b) 				c)
Fig. 14 – Dependence of the cumulative production divergence on the discrepancy between the reservoir pressure curves after 2 years from the beginning of field development

   
à) 				b) 				c)
Fig. 15 – Dependence of the cumulative production divergence on the discrepancy between the reservoir pressure curves after 3 years from the beginning of field development

Results of the obtained equations application on the real field are presented in Tables 5-7. Having analyzed results of calculations it can be concluded that in most cases deviation between divergence of cumulative oil production calculated by obtained equations and historical divegrence of cumulative oil production do not exceed 10 %. Therefore, the obtained equations are correct if they are used for fields that have the same geological and petrophysical properties like in synthetic model. 
As for the analysis of water cut curves divergence, it is equal to 12.5 % in the short-run. Such divergence occurs due to different trend lines of water cut in synthetic model and model of real field. Water cut increases until 70 % during the first year of development in the synthetic model while on the real field smoother water cut growth is observed – 70 % of water cut reaches only after 9 years of field development (Fig. 1, 3a).

Table 5 – Dependence of cumulative oil production divergence on watercut curves divergence   
Development period	Divergence of WCT, %	Divergence of Np after 3 years (using equation), %	Divergence of Np after 3 years (fact), %	Deviation, %	Divergence of Np after 10 years (using equation), %	Divergence of Np after 10 years (fact), %	Deviation, %
1	26.10	18.77	17.43	7.66	18.31	20.42	10.295
2	26.58	20.13		15.48	19.70		3.529
3	25.20	19.96		14.50	19.55		4.230

Table 6 – Dependence of cumulative oil production divergence on oil production rate curves divergence
Development period	Divergence of FOPR, %	Divergence of Np after 3 years (using equation), %	Divergence of Np after 3 years (fact), %	Deviation, %	Divergence of Np after 10 years (using equation), %	Divergence of Np after 10 years (fact), %	Deviation, %
1	15.79	16.57	17.43	4.94	16.24	20.42	20.493
2	15.90	18.30		4.97	17.94		12.137
3	15.83	18.19		4.35	17.78		12.909

Table 7 – Dependence of cumulative oil production divergence on water production rate curves divergence
Development period	Divergence of FWPR, %	Divergence of Np after 3 years (using equation), %	Divergence of Np after 3 years (fact), %	Deviation, %	Divergence of Np after 10 years (using equation), %	Divergence of Np after 10 years (fact), %	Deviation, %
1	36.5	20.2	17.43	15.6	19.7	20.42	3.4
2	35.3	18.9		8.3	18.4		9.9
3	38.5	20.5		17.4	19.9		2.3
 

Conclusion
Analysis of geological, petrophysical uncertainties impact on reservoir performance results of reservoir simulation model was conducted. Results of analysis show that the most important parameters are porosity, permeability distribution; change in relative permeability curves; oil-water contact level; vertical permeability anisotropy.  
Parameters that have the highest impact on divergence of reservoir performance results of reservoir simulation model (FWCT, FOPR, FPR, FWPR) were determined. Change in relative permeability curves has the largest impact on divergence of FWCT, FOPR, FWPR. Change in pore volume and permeability has the largest impact on divergence of FPR.
Equations that can predict divergence of cumulative oil production in the case of imperfect history matching were created.
The obtained equations were applied for real field. Results of application show that in the most cases deviation between the real cumulative oil production divergence and cumulative oil production divergence calculated by equations do not exceed 10 %. 

Nomenclature
PTA – pressure transient analysis
STOIIP – stock tank initially in place 
PV – pore volume
PVT – pressure, volume, temperature
OWC – oil-water contact
NPV – net present value
FWCT – field water cut
FPR – field reservoir pressure
FOPR – field oil production rate
FWPR – field water production rate
Np – cumulative oil production
FLPR – field liquid production rate
FWIR – field water injection rate

Acknowledgments
First of all, I would like to thank to Heriot-Watt University for the opportunity to obtain such valuable knowledge that help me to build my career in the oil and gas industry.
Also, I would like to thank to my supervisor Gleb Shishaev for his support and advices during individual project performance.
Finally, I would like to express my gratitude to Sergey Kaygorodov, OOO «Gazpromneft NTC», who supplied me with data for individual project.
 BREAKS HERE
In this paper is consided the problem of horizontal anisotropy of permeability, which is expressed in the unequal distribution of permeability in various directions in the horizontal plane. The importance of anisotropy of permeability is that anisotropy greatly influences the nature of the hydrodynamic processes in the reservoir. 
To effectively plan the development of the field, it is necessary to assess the possible effect of horizontal permeability anisotropy at an early stage of development. In this regard, there is a need to develop new methods for determining the horizontal permeability anisotropy, which are based on the analysis and processing of available data in the initial stage of field development [4].
In order to solve this problem, several methods have been developed for determining and estimating the basic parameters of the anisotropy horizontal permeability. For the first method, the data of the oriented core was used to construct the rose-diagram. Using the elliptic approximation, the basic parameters of the anisotropy were determined. In the second method, the data of geophysical well logging interpretations were used. The process of parameter determination consisted in transforming log data into permeability maps, and then rose-diagrams were constructed on the basis of statistical processing of permeability maps. For the third method, data from indicator research were used. Based on the data of the average speed of the indicator and phase permeability, rose-diagrams were constructed, which were approximated by an ellipse. To better study the effect of anisotropy on the development of the field, an anisotropic model was simulated. The simulation was conducted using the Petrel software. In addition, during the hydrodynamic simulation, the corresponding diagrams of water cut, oil and liquid production, and production rate were obtained. 
The result of the study is the development of the most suitable methodology for determining the basic parameters for anisotropy of horizontal permeability.

Introduction

In the modern oil industry, much attention is paid to studying the influence of filtration properties in fluid production. The filtration properties of the formation greatly influence the movement of hydrocarbons within the formation in the presence of a pressure drop. 
The existence of filtration heterogeneity of reservoirs is determined by the presence of certain directions in which there is increased intra-layer and inter-layer fluid motion. The presence of heterogeneity is confirmed by the difference in production rates in producing wells, different operation modes of injection wells and numerous studies on core samples. 
At the moment, many field of Western Siberia are assigned to lithologically heterogeneous reservoirs in both terrigenous and carbonate sections. The sharp variability in the filtration properties of the reservoirs often creates great difficulties in their development. Most of the field are developed using artificial water flooding. The development of multi-layered reservoirs using water flooding is impossible without objective information on the nature of fluid movement in the reservoir.
Currently, the most modern method for determining the anisotropy of permeability is the observation well testing, but this method is expensive in conducting the study. Also, in some cases, the method of indicator studies is used, which is used to assess the direction of preferential fluid movements in the formation, such studies are quite expensive and time-consuming. A feature of these methods is that these methods are carried out at a late stage of field development [9].
To effectively plan the development of the field, it is necessary to assess the possible effect of horizontal permeability anisotropy at an early stage of development. In this regard, there is a need to develop new methods for determining the horizontal permeability anisotropy, which are based on the analysis and processing of available data in the initial stage of field development.

Description of field K reservoir U13

The territory of the field K is located in the Kargasoksky district of the Tomsk region, and only a small area of its south-western part is part of the Omsk region of Western Siberia. In the geological structure of the field K area, there are deposits of two structural floors: the Paleozoic folded basement and the Mesozoic-Cenozoic platform cover. According to the microstructural analysis, the northeastern direction of the shoreline is tracked, which is consistent with the proposed facies model of the structure of the bar sedimentary complex in the northern part of this lifted block. The presence of elements of stream facies of the north-western direction can be associated with the presence of discontinuous currents that complicate the seashore.
The oil and gas potential of the deposit is confined to the deposits of the Upper Jurassic, where the Vasyugan, George and Bazhenov Formations are singled out. The main industrial reserves are associated with the layer U13. In the field K, the Upper Jurassic deposits are represented by a complex of shallow and coastal marine facies of the barrier coast formed under the influence of wave and tidal activity. As a result of tidal activity anisotropy was formed in this area. Deposits of the reservoir U13 are analyzed in the interval of 2763.4 - 2781.2 m. In the lower part they are represented by siltstones and fine-grained sandstones, in the upper part - by medium-coarse-grained sandstones. 

 Methodical bases for determination of anisotropic parameters of horizontal permeability

The main task of investigating any effects of the influence of inhomogeneities in filtration properties is to assess the possible manifestation of anisotropy of permeability up to the point of intensive water flooding [11]. In this regard, there is a need to develop various methods for determining the basic parameters of horizontal permeability anisotropy - the direction and magnitude of the horizontal anisotropy of oil and gas reservoirs based on analysis of core data, hydrodynamic and geophysical studies of wells. Based on the obtained data analysis, a geological and petrophysical model is constructed for this field, in order to assess the effect of the anisotropy effect on the field development process. Each type of research is of a certain scale. Oriented thin sections are a micro-level of the study, core studies are meso-level, indicator and hydrodynamic studies are the macro-level of the study. The best approach to investigating the effect of heterogeneity of filtration properties is to combine the results of all methods to obtain the best understanding of the nature of the anisotropy. 

Determination of horizontal permeability anisotropy parameters from core data.  

One of the main methods for determining the geological structure and properties of the rock is core research. The main task of core research is to determine the main parameters of rock occurrence, such as the angle of incidence of structural elements and the azimuth of the strike of geological objects. 
To study the filtration heterogeneity of the reservoir, information was obtained from the collection of samples of the oriented core from the well of the field K was used (see Table 1). The sampling interval of the oriented core is about 20 meters. On all samples of the oriented core, spatial orientation and determination of reservoir properties of the rock were carried out. The main orientation of the obtained core is the north-east and north-west direction.

Table 1. Reservoir properties of the rocks along the well 187 of the deposit K. 
Laboratory number	Reservoir properties	Electric parameters	Elastic characteristics	Orientattion
	Êpor ,%	Êperm, mD	Ðr	Vð*103,m/sec	
1954-02//-1	18.6	212.8	20.2	2.82	N-E
1954-02//-2	18.2	106.4	21.4	2.96	N-W
1957-02//-1	9.8	5.4	34.2	3.73	N-E
1957-02//-2	13.2	2.9	28.7	3.16	N-W
1960-02//-1	12.1	0.5	28.3	3.47	N-E
1960-02//-2	108	0.25	31.1	3.57	N-W
Analyzing the data obtained from the oriented core, it was established that in the core drilled in the north-eastern direction, and the permeability is exceeded, compared with the samples drilled in the north-west direction. Analysis of the data of the oriented core showed that the reservoirs of field K have a significant horizontal anisotropy of permeability, with a predominant orientation in the north-eastern direction. The measured ratios of permeabilities from the data of the oriented core in different directions vary from 1.3 to 2, despite the fact that the coefficient of porosity differs only in tenths.
On the basis of oriented samples of lithological differences, oriented thin sections were made for studying the composition and conditions of formation of rocks and the distribution of anisotropy by methods for analyzing the spatial distribution of particle elongations, and also microstructural studies on quartz.
As a result of measurements, rose-diagrams of distribution of directions of long particles are constructed. The procedure for constructing rose diagrams is that the polar plane divided into sectors, and produce grain counting, which have a direction of elongation axis within each sector 150. For each oriented section in the polar coordinate system, a rose-diagram of the distribution of the direction of the axes of elongation of particles is constructed. The data were presented in a single coordinate system with the same step, normalized to the maximum and reduced to one polar projection for each sample (see Figure 1).
 
Figure 1. Roses-diagram of long particles for well 187 field K.
The obtained rose-diagrams of long particles show that the orientation of the axes of elongation of grains is not constant and varies from sample to sample, depending on the depth of sampling. The fact that the values in each sample vary from depth, can be explained from the point of view of formation of the rock at a certain time, since the sediments were formed during the coastal-marine situation in which the surge-wave activity had a great influence. 
For a more accurate analysis and obtaining the basic parameters of rock heterogeneity, it is necessary to bring all the obtained rose-diagrams into one main rose-diagram to determine the average arithmetic distribution for all samples. The construction of a rose diagram is a distribution of points in a geographic coordinate system. Each point in the rose-diagram has a certain sector of location, where the circle of the geographic coordinate system is divided into several sectors depending on the azimuths. Determination of the main parameters of the rose-diagram was done using elliptic approximation. Describe the points and approximate the mean value of the most practical is the use of an ellipse (see Figure 2). 

 
Figure 2. Elliptic approximation.

In the case of elliptical approximation of permeability anisotropy, the main numerical parameters that characterize the inhomogeneity phenomenon are the ratio of the maximum permeability to the minimum value and the direction of the main axis of the ellipse. The resulting azimuth  ?0, is the direction of the main anisotropy axis of permeability. The ratio of the values of a and b characterizes the ratio of the ratio of the maximum and minimum permeability values. In all the cases considered, the determination of the basic parameters of the anisotropy is of a statistical nature, so an elliptical approximation of the data of the rose diagrams is used to determine them.
Analysis of the generalized rose-diagram shows that the main distribution is bimodal. The main direction of the distribution of long particles is north-east, which indicates that the anisotropy effect takes place in this well. Using a simple scheme of spatial recalculation of the coordinate system and elliptical approximation, it becomes possible to calculate the two main components of the horizontal permittivity Kmax and Kmin, as well as the orientation angle ?0 of the main axis of the ellipse (Kmax) on the generalized rose-diagram (see Figure 3). As a result of approximations received horizontal direction anisotropy north-east angle of orientation 410. From the generalized rose-diagram the ratio of Kmax to Kmin was obtained, which is equal to 1.84. The value of the ratio of the maximum and minimum values of permeability proves that there is a heterogeneity of the filtration properties of a given formation in this section of the deposit, which has a predominant direction to the north-east.
 
Figure 3. A generalized rose diagram of long particles of the well 187 of the field K with elliptic approximation.
The method for determining the horizontal permeability anisotropy parameters based on the data obtained during the interpretation of the geophysical study in well. 

This method of investigating the anisotropy of horizontal permeability assumes the sequence of conversion of logging materials to determine the total and effective porosity, water saturation, clayiness and permeability of rocks across all wells in the area under investigation, and then construct permeability maps for individual permeability intervals (high permeability, medium permeability, low permeability).
The basis for distinguishing different types of permeability is the fact that there is a presence of highly permeable interlayers in the upper part of the section at this deposit. As a result of log analysis and processing, average values for a high permeable, medium permeable and low permeable zone were determined for each well (see Figure 4).
Using the values obtained from log data for all tested wells for each zone of permeability maps were constructed (see Figures 5).
On the map of the highly permeable zone, the preferential orientation of the permeability isolines in the north-east direction can be clearly traced, despite the relatively small limits of the change in permeability values. The average permeability value on the map of the distribution of the high permeability area is 90 mD. On the maps constructed, one can note that the main features of the spatial distribution of the permeability values of the reservoir are preserved and have certain outlines. A further step in the analysis of the obtained maps is the quantitative estimation of the preferred direction based on the analysis of the vector model, which takes into account the orthogonal direction of the isolines.
On the maps constructed, one can note that the main features of the spatial distribution of the permeability values of the reservoir are preserved and have certain outlines. A further step in the analysis of the obtained maps is the quantitative estimation of the preferred direction based on the analysis of the vector model, which takes into account the orthogonal direction of the isolines. To conduct the assessment of the direction, it is required to conduct preliminary statistical processing of maps with determination of the main directions of the isolines of permeability in order to bring it into the geographic coordinate system.

 
Figure 4. Selection of different permeability zones on log data.

 
Figure 5. Map of the distribution of a highly permeable section of the reservoir.
To construct a rose-diagram by permeability maps, it is necessary to transform the direction of isolines into points. The spatial volume is divided into sectors, where each sector has a range of 150. In the sectoral model of isolines values, 6 sectors are formed, in each of which the points of the vector model that are included in this sector range are calculated. Each point represents a certain orientation of the isoline of permeability. During the statistical processing of each sector, points were obtained for different permeability maps, and the statistics for high permeable map are shown in Figure 6. 
 
Figure 6. Statistics of points in the sectoral form for a map of a high permeable zone. 
Statistics show that the largest number of points falls in the sector from 450 to 600, the total number of points in this sector is 369 points (14.79% of the total number of points). The arrangement of points in this sector proves that the preferred direction of the isolines of the vector model is oriented to the north-east. 
Based on the data obtained by statistical processing of maps of different permeabilities, stereograms of the permeability contour perimeter for each map are constructed, which maps the existing inhomogeneity of the filtration properties. Suppose that points located in one sector will be in the opposite sector at the same location from the center, since the points characterize the direction of the isolines of permeability. Using such assumptions, a rose-diagram with a geographic coordinate system is constructed.
The transformed and reduced points in the rose-diagram characterize the permeability in a certain direction. On the given roses-diagrams, a similar procedure of elliptic approximation was carried out, which was considered earlier (see Figure 7).

 
Figure 7. Rose-diagrams obtained from the data of the maps a) of the high-permeability zone, c) of the medium-permeable zone, c) of the low-permeability zone.
Using an elliptical approximation ratios were determined maximum and minimum values of permeability for each rose diagram which describes the degree of anisotropy. For the rose-diagram of high-permeability zones, the value of the anisotropy coefficient is 2.3 with the direction of orientation to the north-east. As the permeability values decrease, the permeability anisotropy coefficient decreases, since it is difficult to determine the anisotropy effect at low permeability values. 
This method of determination is acceptable in the case of analysis and calculation of anisotropic data parameters that are obtained from core or permeability maps from the interpretation of well logging.

The method for determining the anisotropy of horizontal permeability on the basis of data from indicator research.  

One of the most used methods of research and analysis of the actual filtration flows of a productive formation is tracer (indicator) research. The essence of conducting indicator studies is to add to the injection liquid a labeled solution that is displaced to production wells. The advantage of conducting indicator studies is that the studies can be conducted without stopping the wells. Further analysis of the recovered liquid shows what relationship is present between the wells.
To study the current filtration situation and determine the reservoir properties of the reservoir, as well as to clarify the distribution of injected water from the control production wells of the U13 field K, an experimental site was selected, including an injection well 190p and a group of producing wells of the nearest environment (see Figure 8). 
 
Figure 8. Location wells, which researched. 
As a result of tracer studies, data were obtained on the speed of the indicator in this area, the permeability coefficient and the total mass of the extracted indicator. 
So, to analyze and compare the results obtained, it is necessary to bring all the wells into one polar coordinate system in which all points on the plane are characterized by a pair of numbers: the radius and the polar angle. The method of bringing all wells into one system is to place the injection well at the origin, and the associated production wells are relative to the injection well according to their actual location, at the same angles. In this case, the polar radius is one of the registered parameters of the tracer study. 
Based on the results of the indicator study rose-diagrams were constructed using the average speed of the indicator (see Figure 9) and permeability (see Figure 10).
As the results of the analysis and study of the rose-diagrams is the obtaining of the ratio Kmax/Kmin, the azimuth and the direction of anisotropy.
 
Figure 9. Rose-diagram of permeability for the injection well 190p.
 
Figure 10. Rose-diagram of the average speed of the indicator movement for the injection. 
The study showed that the anisotropy in the horizontal direction in this area of the field has a north-eastern orientation (the azimuth for the two results of the rose-diagrams varies from 390 to 440), the ratio of the maximum and minimum ranges from 1.64 to 2.33. These results make it possible to use each study as an independent method for determining the anisotropy of the main parameters. 

Creation of a geological and hydrodynamic model for studying the effect of horizontal permeability anisotropy on the filtration properties of a reservoir. 
 
One of the powerful methods of reservoir management is its modeling, which makes it possible to understand the geology of the formation under study and predict the future behavior of the formation under different variants of the development method. 
The task of this study is investigation the effect of horizontal permeability anisotropy on filtration properties, for this necessary the construction of a geological and hydrodynamic model based on the example of the investigated area of the field K for analyzing and studying the filtration inhomogeneities at a given field. 
To create an anisotropic model, an important parameter is the anisotropy of permeability, which describes the difference in the permeability value for various directions within this medium. The average value for the anisotropy coefficient of horizontal permeability is 1.84. This value was determined from an analysis of all the results obtained earlier. The horizontal permeability anisotropy coefficient is determined by the ratio of two different directions, this usually characterizes the maximum and minimum permeability.
The main oil-bearing horizons of the deposit are two sand layers U12 and U13. The U13 formation is the main productive layer of the field. The porosity at this horizon is in the range 14-18% and has an average value of 16%. Typically, the porosity increases from the base of the formation to its roof. The permeability from the core data is within the range of 0.01-300 mD at an average value of 27 mD. 
For all wells, the bottom and top layers was created. On the basis of the obtained marks of the top and bottom, the structural surfaces were constructed for each layer. To further construction the model, grid for each layer were created. Three-dimensional grids were constructed in the volume between the constructed structural surfaces. To study the effect of the horizontal permeability anisotropy, the grid of this model was reoriented taking into account the previously calculated main axis of the permeability anisotropy orientation. 
In the process of geological modeling, the obtained permeability distribution for different objects shows a pronounced anisotropy of the horizontal component of the Kh. On the permeability map for sand layers, the predominant direction to the north-east is clearly visible (see Figure 11).The distribution of porosity shows that the resulting porosity map essentially repeats the basic features of permeability.
 
Figure 11. Map of permeability. 

Comparative analysis of the quality adaptation wells. 

The next stage in the study of the anisotropy of horizontal permeability is the creation of a filtration model based on a geological model that takes into account the main geological-physical and technological factors, and also describes the real hydrodynamic processes in the reservoir. The main indicators are oil production, water cut, liquid production. Comparison of gives you the opportunity to conclude a quality adaptation model (see Figures 12, 13).

 
Figure 12. Graph of liquid production rate with historical data for isotropic model.
 
Figure 13. Graph of liquid production rate with historical data for anisotropic model.

The liquid production rate for the anisotropic model shows the best convergence with the historical data for this well. 
One of the most objective parameters of the development history, which reacts to the change in permeability, which can be compared from historical and model data is the water cut of the production during the operation of the well. The water-cut graphs were compared with historical data. The constructed anisotropic hydrodynamic model of the investigated section of the field K, when compared with the isotropic model, more accurately reflects the regularities of fluid motion within the horizon under study and makes it possible to make a well-grounded adaptation of the wells.

Discussion 

Based on the studies carried out for different methods of determining the anisotropy of horizontal permeability, the following results were obtained: 
1.	The predominant northeastern orientation of the anisotropy direction of horizontal permeability in the investigated area of the field K is established. Azimuth varies from 39° to 63°, with a average azimuth of 47°.
2.	The ratio of Kmax/Kmin from the calculation methods varies from 1.4 to 2.32. Consequently, the obtained values of the ratios confirm the presence of anisotropy in the horizontal direction.
3.	The average fluid velocity in the formation can also be used to determine the anisotropy of horizontal permeability along with permeability data. The proximity of the results makes it possible to use the value of the average velocity of fluid motion as an independent instrument for determining permeability anisotropy.
4.	To estimate the main parameters of the anisotropy, we used elliptic approximation, in which the obtained rose-diagrams were approximated by a least-squares ellipse. The use of such an approximation makes it possible to more accurately and approximately determine the main parameters of the anisotropy of horizontal permeability.
5.	The orientation of grains has a significant effect on the anisotropy of horizontal permeability. Also, we should not forget that the environment of sedimentation an important role in the formation of the internal structure of the sediment.
Parameters of the horizontal permeability anisotropy, obtained with the help of various methods of determination, are presented in Table 5.1.

Table 2. The main results for all methods.
¹	Rose-diagram	Direction	Orientation (azimuth)	The ratio of the semiaxes of the ellipse	Maximum value	Minimum value
1	Rose-diagram of long particles	NE	41	1.84	20.26	11.23
2	Rose-diagram of high permeability zone	NE	44	2.3	350.67	158.36
3	Rose-diagram of medium permeability zone	NE	52	1.8	315	172
4	Rose-diagram of low permeability zone	NE	63	1.4	277.27	197
5	Rose-diagram of tracers research (permeability)	NE	44	2.32	38.17	16.4
6	Rose-diagram of tracers research (velocity)	NE	39	1.63	43.83	26.86
Conclusion

Investigations carried out to determine the basic parameters of the horizontal permeability anisotropy - the magnitude and direction, based on the data of geophysical studies of wells, oriented core and thin sections, indicator studies and hydrodynamic modeling on the example of the field K, allow us to draw the following conclusions:
1.	In reservoirs with an intergranular type of pore space, the direction of the best permeability in the samples agrees better with the orientation of the long particles. The main axis of the ellipse, which shows the direction of anisotropy, is oriented orthogonally. It should be noted that the distributional condition of the sedimentation, lithologic-petrophysical anisotropic characteristics is influenced by the sedimentation environment.
2.	To determine the basic parameters of the anisotropy of horizontal permeability based on various initial data, the best option is the elliptic approximation. The results of each type of data obtained during the investigation of the well are best described by an ellipse.
3.	Between the permeability, the average speed of the indicator, the porosity there is a correlation relationship.
4.	On the basis of the obtained results of the investigation of methods for determining the basic parameters of the anisotropy of horizontal permeability, the following generalized method for determining the basic parameters of anisotropy is proposed. To determine the anisotropy parameters at the initial stage, when there is no history of water cut, it is necessary to use oriented core and log data. The direction of permeability anisotropy is determined on the basis of permeability mapping, the anisotropy value is determined by means of core permeability measurements. In order to determine the anisotropy parameters at the final stage of field development, it is necessary to use the data on water cut and log data, since at this stage water has already broken through to production wells. The orientation of anisotropy is determined on the basis of log data. Then, comparing the historical and calculated water cut values for each well, the anisotropy value is determined.

Acknowledgements

I would like to express my gratitude for the support and help during individual project the following people:
-	My supervisor Vitaliy Merkulov from Approved Support Centre TPU for the usefully advices and support. 
-	My supervisor Rink van Dijke from Heriot-Watt University.
-	The staff of the Approved Support Centre TPU.
 BREAKS HERE

Hydraulic fracturing in vertical wells has proven to be a successful technique for developing low-permeability reservoirs. Despite being vastly implemented throughout the world, hydraulic fracturing technique is still not fully comprehended and have proved to have complex behavior. Fracture diagnostic tools are used to fill this gap and to directly or indirectly estimate hydraulic fracture characteristics. Direct techniques were reviewed in this paper such as tilt fracture mapping, microseismic fracture mapping, radioactive tracers, temperature logging etc. However, these techniques provide no information about the effective fracture length or conductivity, being able to detect only the total extent of hydraulic fracture growth. Indirect methods are most widely used since they are lower-cost and the data required for analyses are readily available. This group of methods comprises: net pressure fracture analysis, well testing and production analysis. Effective fracture length and conductivity can be estimated based on these indirect measurements.  The analysis of indirect methods is the key issue of this paper.
Specifically, the application of analytical models used for estimation of finite-conductivity vertical fracture performance is the central part of the project. After obtaining acceptable matching of the theoretical and observed flow rates, the inverted problem of hydraulic fracture parameters estimation using production data can be solved. The method can be readily implemented since the production data are always available during the life of the field and no special interpretation techniques are required.
Bulk of the work is dedicated to the assessment of obtained results reliability in comparison with net pressure fracture analysis. The reliability of obtained results is examined by pressure buildup results. However, the problem of well testing quality is one of the main issues of the work. The modeling of fracture propagation in special software was used as additional check point of hydraulic fracturing reports reliability.
In addition, application of analytical models to horizontal wells with multiple fracturing was considered as extended investigation.
Geological description of field S
Oil-gas condensate field S is located in southern part of the Tomsk region in the area of Parabelskiy district . The field is located 340 kilometers from a regional center -Tomsk. The target layer U_1^2 was formed in on the border of marine and continental depositional environments with predominance of first. Two sandstone layers with different flow properties can be distinguished in U_1^2. Formation of upper U_1^2a member is connected to coastal shallow marine depositional environment. Lower U_1^2b member is target in this work. It was formed in the transition zone from marine to continental depositional environment. U_1^2b member is presented by non-uniform interfingering of  fine grained sandstone and coaly mudstone. Sandstone layers are of 1-7 sm, mudstone layers are 1-5 sm. Analysis of wells crossections shows that proportion of U_1^2a sandstone increases in North direction i.e. the percent of  sediments formed in shallow-marine depostional environment becomes dominant.
Properties of the target layer U_1^2. As was discussed above, two members with different flow properties may be distinguished from the target layer  U_1^2.  U_1^2a member is characterized by higher flow properties. It is composed of medium-grained sandstone with low shale content (lower than 5%). Porosity range for this member is 16-21%, permeability range is 32-406 mD. U_1^2b member, underlying U_1^2a, is characterized by lower flow properties with porosity range 12.1-17.2% and permeability range from 0.5 to 14.6 mD.  Average properties for layer U_1^2 and its members are displayed in the table 1 below:

Table 1 – Average properties for the target layer of field S.
Layer/Property	Porosity, %	Permeability, mD	Water Saturation, %
U_1^2	16	10	43
U_1^2a	16.6	39.8	36.5
U_1^2b	15.9	5	45.4

PVT properties. PVT properties used in further analysis are presented in the table 2 below.

Table 2 – PVT properties for layer U_1^2.
Layer	Oil viscosity, cP	Oil density, g/?sm?^3	Oil formation factor	Oil compressibility, 1/atm
U_1^2	0.4	0.575	1.977	4*?10?^(-4)

Current state of the problem
The first group of production data analysis methods utilizes decline type curves. Decline type curve analysis of production data may help in estimating reservoir permeability and stimulation effectiveness without shutting in the well.  Transient flow models were incorporated with decline curve analysis firstly by Fetckovich [1] and [2]. He proposed standard decline type curves by combining analytical model for transient radial flow at constant bottomhole pressure with Arps empirical rate decline models. These models were derived for a well producing at constant bottomhole pressure and boundary-dominated flow conditions.
Crafton [3] considered the limiting assumption about constant bottomhole pressure and developed decline type curves using a rate normalization of the pressure responses. In other words, he converted variable-rate responses to a constant rate responses.
The material balance type curves were introduced by Palacio and Blasingame [4]. This methodology overcomes the constant bottomhole pressure assumption by means of rate normalization and material balance time. Material balance time variable helps to represent the pressure or rate normalized data by a single harmonic decline curve during boundary dominated flow. They also included several transient models, including well with infinite-conductivity vertical fractures.
Pratikno et al. [5] also combined material balance time concept with transient flow model for a well with finite-conductivity vertical fracture.  Agarwal et al also was able to develop decline type curves for two cases of infinite- and finite-conductivity vertical fractures. The values of these papers is that it provides decline type curve behavior for the case of a well with fracture. These type curves are developed for finite conductivity fractures.
Rushing et al [6] used new material balance decline type curves proposed by Pratikno et al. The method of desuperposition technique was used which combines transient and boundary-dominated flow models. This method was new in the way that it uses short-term pressure buildup test results in order to improve production data analysis. It is particularly significant for interpretation of early-time transient flow from which effective fracture parameters such as conductivity and half-length can be evaluated. Utilization of new type curves provides better results when fracture C_fd is low.
Mattar and Anderson [7] introduced a work identifying the advantages and disadvantages of the methods used for production data analysis. They analyzed methods utilizing type curves such as Blasingame and Agarwal-Gardner methods which are similar to traditional Fetkovich method.
Production data analysis techniques of second group consider the historical production data as extended drawdown test. The data is analyzed using constant pressure transient testing theory and superposition functions. Specific flow regimes such as bilinear, formation linear and pseudoradial should be identified in order to perform the analysis. Specialized plotting techniques may also be used as for traditional pressure transient testing to obtain fracture characteristics flow each flow regime. This ability to determine flow regimes favorably distinguish the technique from conventional decline type curves technique. 
Hasanov et al. [8]  utilized mathematical models  summarized by Azari et al. [9]. These mathematical models are suitable for various transient flow regimes providing constant wellbore pressure and constant flowrate for the well with finite conductivity vertical fracture. In their work Hasanov et al. predicted the flowrate dynamics for the well with finite hydraulic fracture using mentioned above analytical models. These mathematical models comprise fracture parameters in an explicit form. 
The strengths and limitations of production data analysis techniques were also presented by England et al. [10]. The authors marked that production matching methods are characterized by inability to provide unique solutions due to the fact that several variables have to be fixed while matching is performed. Ehlig-Ecnomides et al. 2006 noted that the major disadvantage of PDA is poor data quality that makes this method challenging. 
Production data is rarely characterized by the same quality, quantity and accuracy as data obtained during pressure buildup test Anderson et al. [11]. Coherent analysis from production data may be obtained providing the understanding what information may be derived from the data.
Indirect fracture diagnostic techniques
Net pressure fracture analysis
 Fracture modeling may be used in order to estimate fracture dimensions and conductivity. According to this method, the observed net-pressure during hydraulic fracturing implementation is matched with modeled net pressure by adjusting some models parameters. Net pressure may be calculated using the following equation presented by Nolte and presented in the paper [15]:
p_net=p_surface+p_hydrostatic-?p_friction-?_closure
	As can be seen, the observed net pressure is calculated from downhole or surface pressure subtracting the fractional component and fracture pressure and applying for hydrostatic pressure.
In order to achieve matching to observed net pressure, model net pressure may be changed using several assumptions.
	For reliable hydraulic-fracture growth modeling, two key components are required: an accurate Earth model and a proper knowledge of the process and physics of fracture propagation. Although the accuracy of developed Earth model depends on the amount of gathered data, in many cases main parameters such as stress profiles above and below the reservoir and rock properties are not well known. In many cases the nature of fracture growth is also not well understood and characterized by uncertainties. Therefore, the discussed above uncertainties in the Earth model and the physics of fracture growth do not allow for reliable fracture geometry estimation. Moreover, it is common practice that obtained geometry from fracture modeling does not coincide with the fracture geometry obtained from microseismic and tiltmeter mapping. The main limitation of net pressure analysis is that the solution is non-unique.  
Through the example of Overton field presented by Cipolla et al.  [16], in their work, the authors showed how  two net pressure matches being  equally good, may be obtained using different assumptions about fracture propagation. The first match  assumes complex fracture growth with simultaneous multiple fractures propagation. This results in short fracture with extensive height growth. The second match was obtained with the fracture model calibrated to microseismic survey data. This calibrated model results in a long fracture.
Therefore, differences in fracture geometry may arise in the case when the physics of fracture propagation is uncertain. In the discussed above example assumption of complex fracture growth model gave the fracture length of 525 ft, while the actual length is 1500 ft.
 	The reliability of net pressure analysis method increases when the results are integrated with other direct and indirect diagnostic methods such as production analysis, pressure transient analysis, microseismic and tiltmeter surveys in order to confirm the fracture model [16].
Well testing 
 	Quality control of hydraulic fracturing treatment is essential at every step of performing the procedure from the process of selecting candidate wells to efficiency evaluation. Well testing is one of the methods which allows for independent estimation of quality of performed hydraulic fracturing treatment. Well testing provides the opportunity to estimate the main parameters of hydraulic fracture (halflength and conductivity) as well as the characteristics of the target reservoir (permeability, reservoir pressure). Comparison of hydraulic fracture parameters obtained by well testing with reported results after hydraulic fracturing implementation allows for estimation of quality of contractor’s work and planning the actions of increasing of improving treatment efficiency [17]. 
Estimation of fracture parameters. Hydraulic fracture parameters estimation by means of build-up is based on identification and analysis of reservoir fluid flow regimes towards the well due to pressure redistribution in the reservoir with hydraulic fracture after fracture closure.Log-log diagnostic plots for the well with hydraulic fracture allow for determination of different flow regimes which can be identified by straight lines with characteristic slope. The following flow regimes may be identified: bilinear (the combination of two linear flows: linear flow in the reservoir and linear flow in the fracture); linear (linear flow in the reservoir after end of bilinear flow); pseudoradial (can be identified in the case when the radius of investigation significantly exceeds the fracture dimensions and lines of fluid flow coverage to the well radially) [17].
Linear flow from the reservoir to the fracture may exist in the presence of the fracture with infinite as well as finite conductivity. For the finite conductivity fractures (C_fd<300), pressure drop in the fracture can be identified which allows diagnosing the bilinear flow as well as the linear flow. For the finite conductivity (C_fd<300), the pressure drop is not accounted for, therefore only linear flow can be identified.
Pseudo-radial flow follows linear flow from the reservoir to the fracture. The pseudoradial flow can by identified by observation of horizontal line of logarithmic pressure derivative versus logarithmic time. In order to achieve presudoradial flow, it is necessary that the survey will be long enough in order to achieve complete build-up of pressure in the well. 
For the hydraulically fractured well, the onset of pseudoradial flow is dictated by permeability of the reservoir as well as the fracture parameters such as length and dimensionless conductivity. 
Typical build-up models are employed in order to estimate the required duration of the survey in well testing design for the well with hydraulic fracture. Duration of the build-up survey is defined in each specific case on the basis of reservoir characteristics. Operational period of the well before shut-in for build-up is recommended to be not less than four to five cycles of onset of the pseudoradial flow. 
Results of analytical investigations
 
Figure 1 – Derivative log-log diagnostic for fractured well

As the result of built-up analysis (Fig.2) in the well with hydraulic fracture the following parameters allowing for estimation of hydraulic fracturing treatment quality, can be obtained:
	Dimensionless fracture conductivity (C_fd), characterizing true proppant pack conductivity in the fracture from the bilinear flow with ? slope;
	Effective fracture half-length from the linear flow with ? slope;
	Actual skin factor (pseudoradial skin)
	k_h- fluid mobility in horizontal plain [17];
Analytical models for hydraulic fracture parameters estimation of vertical wells
Methods, used in this work are based on pressure transient testing of finite-conductivity, vertically fractured wells. Analytical bilinear model was developed by Cinco-Ley et al. [18] in order to describe pressure behavior of finite-conductivity vertical fractures. The following assumptions were used by Cinco-Ley et al. [18] in order to develop analytic bilinear flow model (Fig. 3):
 
Figure 2 – Fracture model
	An isotropic, homogeneous, horizontal, infinite reservoir which is characterized by uniform properties such as thickness, permeability and porosity. The reservoir is bounded by upper and lower seal.
	The fluid is slightly compressible with constant compressibility and viscosity
	Finite conductivity fracture  with constant characteristics: half-length x_f, with w, permeability k_f
	The flow across the edge of the fracture is assumed to be negligible due to small fracture width compared with the fracture length
In general, the bilinear flow model developed by Cinco-Ley assumes that fluid in the fracture flows linearly toward the wellbore and formation fluid flows perpendicularly to the fracture wing.
The disadvantage of this model is that due to simplistic representation of the flow geometry  it is applicable only for early-time pressure behavior when the pressure transients are not felt at the tip of the fracture. 
Lee and Brockenbrough [19] first introduced trilinear fracture geometry  (Fig. 4) having additional x-component flow in the formation.
 
Figure 3 – Trilinear fracture model
Bilinear and trilinear fracture flow models are characterized by identical early-time behavior for high fracture conductivities when fluid flow in the formation along the fracture face is negligible. In the case of low conductivity fractures the additional x-component is able to more accurately represent fluid flow. For this type of fractures the fluid flows both inside in the fracture and in the formation.
Trilinear model has advantage over bilinear model in that it is able to produce solutions for the time when the tip of the fracture has been reached by pressure transient response (onset of formation linear flow) which is possible by incorporating additional x-component of formation flow. 
The bilinear model is mainly used in order to describe pressure transient responses for the fractures with mid dimensionless conductivities dominated by bilinear flow. Main disadvantage of the bilinear flow model in this particular case is that it is unable to produce the transition to formation linear or pseudoradial flow.
Azari et al.  [20] evolved  model derived by Lee and Brockenbrough [19]. They model in addition to the trilinear fracture flow transform is able to asymptotically shift the flow to pseudoradial when excessive pressure drops are encountered. In addition, the model developed by Azari et al is not limited to the high conductivity fractures in which flow through the fracture is the only fluid flow to the wellbore. It is applicable to low conductivity fractures and can represent the flow through the least resistant path inside the formation.
Azari, Soliman and Wooden [21] fully exploit solutions for constant pressure well testing which has not been fully analyzed. They developed a direct analytic solution for constant pressure analysis of finite conductivity hydraulic fractures describing all flow regimes. In addition, they presented analytically derived declining rate type curves, Moreover, type curves identifying the influence of fracture conductivity,  storage and linear skin were presented.
Data summary
The input data for this research includes hydraulic fracturing reports, well testing reports and production data.  This data were delivered by Tomskgazprom Supervisor Andrey Voronkov. Some well testing data were re-interpret in order to obtain more reliable hydraulic fracture parameters. The production data comprises monthly liquid flowrates, bottomhole pressures and filed log with reasons for wells shut-in. The data were delivered for a number of wells from which suitable candidates were selected. The data for selected wells is presented in the table 3
Well #	Frac report	Well testing	Cycling mode
1S	complete	present	no
2S	incomplete	present	no
3S	complete	fracture breakthrough in ? U?_1^1	no
4S	incomplete	low pressure measurement quality	no
5S	min information	unreliable	no
6S	min information	unreliable	partially
7S	min information	unreliable	partially
8S	incomplete	well testing before fracturing	no
9S	complete	well testing before fracturing	no
10S	min information	absent	no
Table 3 – Input data.
 
Analytical models implementation fot fracture parameters estimation
This method is based on the discussed above mathematical models derived for pressure transient behavior for a well with a finite-conductivity vertical fracture. Then, constant pressure solutions were obtained by applying the superposition principle either in real-time or in Laplace-space for constant rate case. The results were summarized by Azari et al. [21] and presented in the work. The analytical models for constant pressure problem are present below. 
Bilinear flow:
q_wD=(v(C_fd ) t_Dxf^(-1/4))/?Ã(3/4) 
where C_fd- dimensionless fracture conductivity;
t_Dxf-dimensionless time;
Ã – gamma function
Formation linear flow
?q_wD=2/?^(3/2)  t?_Dxf^(-1/2)
Pseudoradial flow
q_wD=1/(0.5 ln?((4t_Dxf)/?)+ln(x_f/(r_w^' )))
Where x_f-fracture halflenght, m;
r_w^'-effective wellbore radius, m;
?-Euler’s constant.
Pseudo steady-state flow
q_wD=1/(0.5ln(4A/(?C_A r_w^'2 )))
where A- well drainage area, m^2;
		C_A- the Dietz shape factor
	Effective wellbore radius for the well with one vertical fracture may be approximately estimated as r_w^'=x_f/2 or through the equation r_w^'=r_w e^(-S) [23].  The first equation was used in the presented above formulae.
After calculating of dimensionless variables, this was converted to the real time variables through the following equations:
q_D=18.41B?/(kh(p_e-p_w)) q
t_D=kt/(??c_t x_f^2 )
C_fd=(k_f w)/(kx_f )
where 	k_f- proppant permeability, mD;
w-average fracture conductivity, mm;
?-oil viscosity, cP;
c_t-oil compressibility, 1/atm;
k-reservoir permeability, mD
?-reservoir porosity, frac.;
B-formation oil factor, m^3/m^3;
p_e-reservoir pressure at drainage boundary, atm;
p_w- bottomohole pressure, atm;
t-the onset of particular flow regime, hrs.
Bilinear and formation linear flows are characterized by short duration. The paper [21] suggests that the onset of pseudoradial flow occurs at a dimensionless time of 1.3 on condition that the dimensionless fracture conductivity is above 2. The spreadsheet for one of the wells is present in App. A. It can be seen that dimensionless time of 1.3 corresponds to approximately 1.5 months of real time. Having monthly liquid production rates and bottomhole pressures, bilinear and formation linear flows can not be analyzed by production data analysis method.
	Therefore only two flow regimes pseudoradial and pseudo steady-state will be considered in order to determine hydraulic fracture parameters based on production data. Fracture half-length can be derived from pseudoradial flow and skin can be derived from pseudo steady state flow. Fracture C_fd can be potentially obtained from bilinear flow for fractures of low conductivities [0.1;?/2] (Azari et al.) [21]. 
	Analysis for two wells will be presented in the main body of this paper.	The analysis procedure is as follows: hydraulic fracturing parameters from fracturing report were taken as first approximation. Then, fracture half-length and skin were adjusted until best match to the observed data was obtained.
The analysis procedure is as follows: hydraulic fracturing parameters from fracturing report were taken as first approximation. Then, fracture half-length and skin were adjusted until best match to the observed data was obtained.

 	 
Figure 4 – Matching for the wells 1S and 2S
Obtained results for the wells are displayed in the table 4. 
Table 4 – results comparison for three methods
Well#/Parameter	Cfd	xf,m	w, mm	Skin
1S (Frac. report)	5.05	108.75	4.43	-5
1S (Prod. analysis)		6.53	84	-	-5.4
2S (Frac. report)	20.3	164.6	2.7	-5.9
2S (Prod. analysis)	6.44	130	-	-5.8

The results obtained by means of discussed above method will be further compared to the other methods of indirect hydraulic fracturing diagnostics: net pressure analysis (from fracturing reports), well testing results and software analysis (will be discussed in # chapters). 
The discussed above method of fracture parameters diagnostics is characterized by a number of uncertainties and limitations:
	First of all, results are dependent on model assumptions. For example, infinite, homogeneous reservoir with constant properties which may not be consistent with fact. Constant fracture parameters is another assumption which may lead to inaccuracy since it is common case that fracture characterized by unequal width of lengths and the fracture height is not constant;
	The main uncertainty in this case is reservoir and fluid parameters such as reservoir permeability, porosity, thickness, PVT properties. Permeability is parameters which affect the most on the outcome. (sensitivity analysis). To show how permeability affects the outcome, sensitivity analysis will be performed (Fig. 11 and Fig.12). Sensitivity analysis should be performed for every flow regime separately since specific well pattern is responsible for corresponding fracture parameter. It was performed varying one variable having the other parameters constant.
	As it can be seen from the analysis, permeability change has the greatest influence whilst the fracture fracture parameters are of second order influence. Therefore, in order to obtain reliable results based on production analysis method, the uncertainty in permeability should be minimized. The determination of reliable permeability value characterizing the reservoir starts with laboratory core analysis. This point-to-point determination should be extended to continuous permeability estimation by means of well logging. Reliable well testing often aids in permeability determination.  
	In the case of field “S” well testing survey was usually conducted after hydraulic fracturing treatment. In this case the pseudoradial flow from which reservoir permeability may be obtained takes much time to commence. No one
	The end of pseudoradial and onset of pseudo steady-state flow. The onset of pseudo steady-state flow regime is unique for every case. This depended on the development pattern and well spacing for every particular case. of the analyzed wells showed pseudoradial flow behavior during the survey.  
	One of the limitations is that fracture conductivity is difficult to determine. As was discussed above, the duration of bilinear flow from which that parameter can be derived is short for relatively high conductivity fractures and often masked by wellbore storage effect. 
Well testing results analysis
As was mentioned above, confirmation of reliability of implemented production analysis method is difficult to accomplish without having post-fracture pressure buildup results. The combination of pre- and post-fracture pressure buildups is assumed to be the most reliable methodology of fracture parameters determination. However, there is no one case of presence of this combination in the case of the field S. Pre- or post-fracture pressure buildups are available for the wells. Therefore, the fracture parameters derived from post-fracture buildup can not serve as reference and may be only rough estimate for comparison with the results obtained by means of production data analysis.
Diagnostic plots for the wells 1S and 2S are presented in the Fig. 13 and 14 respectively.
 	 
Figure 5 – Well testing for the wells 1S and 2S 

The results of diagnostic analysis are presented in the summary table 5.
Table 5 – Summary table. 
Well/parameter	C_fd	x_f, m	w, mm	Skin
 1S (Frac. report)	5,05	108,75	4,43	-5
1S (Prod. analysis)	6.53	84	-	-5.4
1S (WTA)	4,75	73.8	-	-6
2S (Frac. repot)	20,3	164,6	2,70	-5,9
2S (Prod. analysis)	11	120	-	-5.8
2S (WTA)	20	33	-	-4,7

	Form the table it can be seen that the WTA result for the well 1S is consistent with other methods. However, incomplete pressure buildup is observed for this case.
	The fracture half-length for the well 2S is completely different from other methods. In this case, the well required significantly more time for complete pressure buildup during the linear flow. 
	In addition, the possible reasons of incorrect WTA result are summarized below:
	Incomplete pressure buildup which is one of the main problems of low permeability reservoirs
	Incorrect formation permeability estimation
	Low pressure measurements quality
	Fracture breakthrough in the layer with different fluid properties
Fracture modeling in FracproPT software
For the wells where complete set of hydraulic fracturing treatment information available (number of stages, slurry volume and proppant concentration per every stage, proppant and slurry type). Moreover, rock properties such as stress, Young’s modulus, Poisson’s ratio are also needed to be obtained from the contractor’s reports. For the wells where this data is absent, fracture modeling seems to be inaccurate and inappropriate for comparison analysis. 
The modelling procedure starts with setting wellbore configuration. In this section openhole length, casing and tubing lengths, perforation interval, number of perforations and their diameter, deviation survey should be set. 
The next step is to determine reservoir parameters. The sequence of layers and rock properties were taken from contractor’s report (Fig.B1 and B2) 
	Proppant and fluid types were selected corresponding to hydraulic fracturing report (Fig. B3 and B4). 
Hydraulic fracturing treatment for the well 1S was performed in six stages. Pad volume, slurry volume, flush volume, proppant concentration were taken from hydraulic fracturing report (Fig. B5). This information is necessary for accurate hydraulic fracturing modelling. Some contractors do not provide the information about fracturing stages, therefore software analysis can not be performed for these wells. The comparison of modeled results with contractor’s model is displayed in Appendeix A. One should be careful when interpreting the fracture modeling results. In the case of the well 1S, it can be seen that FracproPT software proves fracture conductivity profile whilst contractor’s report provides width profile. Also, it should be noted that FracproPT software and contractor’s software are of different scales.
Obtained results are presented in the summary table 6 below.
Table 6 – Summary table for the methods analyzed
Well/parameter	C_fd	x_f, m	w, mm	Skin
1S (Frac. report)	5,05	108,75	4,43	-5
1S (Prod. analysis)	6.53	84	-	-5.4
1S (WTA)	4,75	73.8	-	-6
1S (FracproPT)	9.87	86.5	3.93	-
2S (Frac. repot)	20,3	164,6	2,70	-5,9
2S (Prod. analysis)	11	120	-	-5.8
2S (WTA)	20	33	-	-4,7
2S (FracproPT)	27.3	178.5	3.84	-

Results discussion:
	For the wells with fracturing reports with incomplete data set characterizing fracturing stages, software analysis will be inaccurate. It can be used only as approximate result for further comparison.
	Obtained C_fd values seem to be higher in the model case than in the real treatment. This can be explained by formation damage caused by filter cake or fracturing fluid-reservoir rock incompatibility. Fracturing fluid contains polymer molecules joined by crosslinking agent.  These polymer molecules are too large to be able to flow through the pore throat and form external filter cake on the fracture surface. This is especially true for low permeability formations as in the case of field «S». The chemical breaker is used to degrade the fracturing fluid viscosity. However, the breaker is unable to destroy the filter cake which decreases the fracture conductivity. 
	 In addition, the embedment of the proppant layers in the filter cake and in the formation itself after fracture closure control fracture width open to flow. Fracture width along with the proppant permeability is the key parameters controlling the fracture flow capacity. [manual].
	Pad, flush and slurry types are not always available in the software used for fracture modelling. This may contribute to additional inaccuracy in the obtained results.
 Conclusions
The ability to reliably determine hydraulic fracture parameters is a key point for hydraulic fracturing design optimization. This comprehensive issue cannot be covered by one diagnostic method such as net pressure analysis during hydraulic fracturing treatment which is characterized by its specific limitations and uncertainties. The major limitation of this technique is solution non-uniqueness especially when the physics of fracture propagation is uncertain. However, reliable solutions can be obtained integrating the results from multiple diagnostic methods.
Discussed in this paper production data analysis method which considers the flow rate and pressure histories to be an extended drawdown test. The solutions describing flow rate for each flow regime were obtained for constant pressure case. The fracture parameters can be obtained by matching observed and calculated flow rates, adjusting fracture parameters and no specialized plotting techniques are required. Therefore, the main advantage of this methodology is simplicity which was the main requirement. This diagnostic technique is useful for quick estimation of hydraulic fracturing parameters or post-fracture oil flow rate. For accurate fracture parameters estimation special conditions are required. First of all, reservoir permeability should be reliably determined from pressure buildup test. The second issue is accurate estimation of bottomhole and reservoir pressures. Even inaccuracies in PVT properties estimation may adverse contribute to the final result.
In order to obtain more reliable fracture parameters the following may be recommended.
The combination of pre- and post-fracture pressure buildup tests is assumed to be the most powerful technique used to evaluate hydraulic fracture performance. Pre-fracture pressure buildup test in a low permeability reservoir can provide valuable measurements of permeability and pressure that significantly reduce the uncertainty in determining effective fracture fracture length from subsequent production and post-fracture buildup analyses. 
 BREAKS HERE

The field development project is primarily a commercial project, and investment analysis requires an analysis of possible risks and an assessment of the impact of various uncertainties on the result, as well as the rationale for the most likely options. Simulation of the development of oil deposits simplifies the work, but on the other hand it requires large numerical calculations.
In this study surrogate proxy modeling is proposed as a tool for fast uncertainty analysis and prediction of oil production. The object of the study is the surrogate proxy model of the reservoir, based on the numerical modeling of the Krapivinsk field.
The aim of the work is to develop a technique for surrogate proxy modeling for rapid estimation of uncertainties and forecasting of oil production.
In the process of the research, an analytical review of the literature on the selected topic of modeling and machine learning was conducted, Russian and foreign technical solutions were studied, and surrogate proxy modeling of the deposit site was conducted.
As a result of the research, a technique for surrogate proxy modeling was developed, based on the results of numerical modeling of the formation.
The main design, technological and technical-operational characteristics include surrogate proxy-model based on the method of training neural networks on the principle of learning with the teacher.

Introduction

The development of oil fields is based on the integrated design of the development system. At the moment, to improve the efficiency of the project, the simulation of oil reservoir development is used. Mathematical modeling helps to estimate the likely result of reservoir development and increase oil recovery by 10-25% [1]. A comprehensive analysis of the available information obtained by the methods of oil and gas field geology is the basis for designing [2]. Specialists of the oil and gas industry have to work with a large number of uncertainties of the initial data, which are the result of obtaining only local information from exploratory wells, as well as inaccuracies in techniques and equipment. Numerical simulation is main tool for petroleum engineer to create development project [3].  At the moment, numerical models demonstrate high accuracy, because the equations used are based on physical processes, however, they are limited in the speed of computation due to the scale of the models simulating the reservoir through the structure of cells possessing a set of static and dynamic parameters and the technological side of the electronic computers used. Often, oil and gas companies have tight deadlines for project implementation, and a rapid assessment of uncertainties is required, as well as a change in the model while field development. At the moment, common fast tools for estimating deviations of parameters are the analytical proxy models of reservoirs, but they have insufficient accuracy due to the fact that many factors are not taken into account [4]. The main difference between the proxy model and the numerical model of the reservoir is the lack of calculation of the flow between the cells.
The use of non-traditional mathematical sections in the oil industry began in the 80's of the XX century. From data analysis in geology and geophysics [5] to the choice of methods of influence on the deposit [6]. In the Russian Academy of Sciences methods of fuzzy logic in modeling of deposits were considered [7]. B. Ivanenko considered the use of neural networks in the modeling of hydrogeological objects [8]. Now the problem of fast estimation of uncertainties is one of the components of the concept of intellectual fields [9]. One of the successful directions of proxy modeling is surrogate reservoir models, significant results of this direction can be noted in the developments of the University of West Virginia and the company Intelligent Solutions, Inc. [10 -11].
The technique of creating a surrogate proxy model of the reservoir is the subject of investigation. Scientific novelty lies in the development of the concept of surrogate proxy modeling using neural networks. The results of this work can be used in designing the development of oil fields to quickly assess the impact of uncertainties on oil production.

Geological description

The uncertainty analysis is relevant for complex geological objects that have significant heterogeneity. In Western Siberia, a typical representative of complex objects is the Krapivinsk field. Large variability of reservoir properties along a section, heterogeneity, both vertical and lateral.
Krapivinsk oil field is located in the Tomsk region of Russian Federation. Tectonically field affects two third order structure - Krapivinsk and Western Krapivinsk that is part of the dome-shaped elevation Moiseevskaya included in the southern part Kaymysov arch. It is presented in Figure 1.1.
 
Figure 1.1 Location of Krapivinsk oil field 
Upper Jurassic sediments complex is characterized as difficult with a lot of facies, localized on Krapivinsk and linked to Vasyugan, St. George's, the Bazhenov Formation. A prominent feature of the upper part of the Jurassic deposits is the occurrence of a regressive-transgressive order it appears in the underlying sediments of the Tyumen suite characterized by the presence in the upper part of the section of black bituminous mudstones Bazhenov Formation, which geologists call the Western Siberia strong regional, lithofacies and chronological datum.
Upper Jurassic complex of rocks allocated in the volume horizon U-1 is the principal object field development opened exploration and production wells. It can be characterized by a noticeable complex geological structure, manifested in large lateral and vertical heterogeneity of productive strata, high variability of petrophysical reservoir properties, predetermined the uneven distribution of wells in the high- and low productivity. The total thickness of the horizon over the area varies from 20 to 30 m, effective - 15 to 24 m [12].
The value of geological information is to maximize the model to the object of interest. However, obtaining geological information is a difficult task. In fact, reliable geological information can only be obtained by a direct method by examining core samples, and estimated using geophysical data or hydrodynamic well test results. At the same time, an adequate reflection of the geological characteristics of the formation is possible only for deposits with a simple structure. For complex deposits, there is a discrepancy between the parameters of the reservoir element and the development object. And if at the stage of design and calculation of reserves, geological studies are mainly aimed at identifying the volumes and contours of oil-saturated reservoirs, then at the development stage, it is required to justify the directions and rates of filtration, which in turn suggests studies of heterogeneity of geological characteristics of the formation or, in other words, Reservoir [13].
For complex reservoirs, a large estimate of the uncertainties is most relevant. Typical representatives are oil fields of Western Siberia such as Krapivinsk. The most relevant solution is the rigid binding of the reservoir to sedimentological models based on the larger material of the accumulated material on regularities in reservoir systems similar in their formation [14]. For this, a detailed correlation of well sections along the sedimentation cycles is carried out in advance, and in principle, preliminary charts are compiled for each cycle, for example, effective thicknesses.

Surrogate proxy model

The surrogate proxy model is a smart proxy model. The technology is a learning of this model based on the results of numerical hydrodynamic modeling. Machine learning methods are applied and ultimately the surrogate model becomes capable of reproducing the functional of the numerical model. At the University of West Virginia and Intelligent Solutions, Inc., a numerical model of a giant oil field in the Middle East was used to implement this concept [10]. The technology is called the Grid-based Surrogate Reservoir Model and is able to reproduce the dynamic state (reservoir pressure and saturation value) of each cell for each time point of the numerical calculation with the required accuracy and, most importantly, at a high speed in comparison with traditional hydrodynamic modeling. The principle is based on creating a regression relationship between the values of the cell state parameters and the neighboring block states at the previous time step with the dynamic state of the cell at the calculated time step. There was an imitation of calculation of liquid filtration through the black box. Also, the input parameters in the model were the indicators of producing and suppuration wells in the previous step, and the same parameters changed at the calculated stage.
This team from the University of West Virginia and Intelligent Solutions, Inc. with other specialists released an article in 2015 on the results of the surrogate proxy simulation of the giant oil field in the United Arab Emirates [11]. The model contained several million cells and displayed the structure of complex, fractured carbonate reservoirs with more than 500 wells. The model was based on a number of variants of numerical calculations to match the set of development indicators such as reservoir pressure, gas factor, water cut of the production. This was done in order to quickly assess the desired diameter of the borehole to maximize oil production with minimal water cut. The model with the required accuracy coped with the forecast of the main indicators as oil production rate, water cut and gas factor.
Consideration of the above examples of surrogate models leads to the concept of machine learning. Machine learning is at the intersection of mathematical statistics, optimization methods and classical mathematical disciplines [15]. This direction is a subsection of artificial intelligence and studies methods of constructing algorithms that can be trained. One typical problem is the problem of regression, involving "learning with the teacher" when it is required to find a functional relationship between the answer and the input values of the object. One of the ways of realizing this task is the method of neural networks.

Artificial neural network

In the fifties and sixties, a group of researchers, combining biological and physiological approaches, created the first artificial neural networks. In 1962 the work of F. Rosenblatt was published, in which he proposed the type of ANN, which he called the perceptron [16]. The element of the cellular structure of the brain is a neural cell - a neuron, which has biological tissues that are common to other cells. However, the nerve cell differs significantly from others in its functional purpose. The neuron performs the reception, the elementary transformation and the further transfer of information to other neurons. Information is transferred in the form of impulses of nervous activity, having an electrochemical nature. In figure 1.2 the scheme of the structure of a typical neuron is given. The body of the cell contains a number of branching processes of two types. Processes of the first type, called dendrites, for their similarity to the crown of a sprawling tree, serve as input channels for nerve impulses from other neurons. These impulses to the axon enter the soma, causing its specific excitation, which then spreads through the outcropping of the second type [8].
 
Figure 1.2. A typical scheme of the structure of a biological neuron [8]

McCulloch and Pitts proposed a model in which a neuron is considered a binary element [17]. The structural scheme of this model is shown in figure 1.3. The input signals xj (j = 1, 2, ..., N) are summed taking into account the corresponding weights wij (the signal arrives in the direction from node i to node j) in the adder. The output signal of the neuron yi is determined by the dependence:
 			(1.1)

Limitations of weak signals and strong falls at the ends of the activation functions were overcome when using multi-layer perceptrons (MLP), but for a long time there was no theoretically grounded algorithm for learning multi-layered artificial neural networks. In 1986, in [18], an algorithm for training multilayer perceptrons based on the calculation of the gradient of the error function was proposed, which was called the back propagation of the error.
The ability to learn is a fundamental property of the brain. In the context of INS, the learning process has the following definition. Adjusting the weights and architecture of the neural network to solve the problem is called a learning procedure. The network is trained to give a desired (or, at least, consistent with it) a set of outputs for a number of inputs. Each such input (or output) set is treated as a vector. Training is carried out by sequential presentation of input vectors with simultaneous adjustment of scales in accordance with a certain procedure.
 
Figure 1.3. Artificial neuron [19]

The concept of developed surrogate proxy model

By the method of surrogate proxy modeling, the method of neural networks was chosen. It allows to solve the problem of regression and comparison of input and output data.
The task is set as a search for the architecture of a neural network capable of performing a surrogate proxy simulation of the reservoir. The concept of the technology being developed involves linking the state of the reservoir model cells with the state of this cell and its neighbors at the previous time step, as well as with the indicators of the wells and all the production as a whole - figure 2.1.
 
Figure 2.1 - The concept of the proposed surrogate proxy model

The limited time for the project imposes a restriction on the depth of the neural network research and simple architectures will be used for the study: a multilayer perceptron and a radial-basis function.
The architecture data can be implemented in the software package STATISTICA Neural Nets due to the convenient work with large data sets. It is supposed to do a lot of calculations of different architectures for finding the best option.
The general methodology of study includes:
1.	Creation of a numerical hydrodynamic model of the Krapivinsk field site based on the initial data.
2.	Selection of an internal area of small size with good heterogeneity of petrophysical properties for model training.
3.	Conducting experiments to build a surrogate proxy model of the reservoir.
4.	Interpretation of experimental results for choosing the best architecture.
The creation of a hydrodynamic model begins with the construction of a geological model. The site is selected at 5000x5000 m near the well. The lithology of the site is filled with a stochastic method in accordance with the correlation ranks for transient depositional environment. The grades were accepted as 3000õ1500 m. Permeable rocks of sandstone type are filled with petrophysical properties - porosity and permeability through functional dependence.
To train neural networks, as much as possible various data are needed, then a zone with a noticeable heterogeneity in petrophysical parameters will be chosen on the simulated site. In this zone, 4 production and 5 injection wells will be modeled according to the five-point development system.
For the surrogate proxy model, 58 input vectors containing the following parameters relating to the previous time step relative to the calculated one should be generated:
1.	Porosity, horizontal and vertical permeability, reservoir pressure and water saturation value in the cell under study;
2.	For the neighbor cells along the X and Y axis: porosity, horizontal permeability, formation pressure and water saturation value;
3.	For the neighbor cells along the Z axis: porosity, vertical permeability, formation pressure and water saturation value;
4.	Bottomhole pressure and flow rates of all wells;
5.	Indicators of oil, water and water injection.
6.	Formed 22 output vectors containing parameters for the calculated step:
7.	Reservoir pressure and the water saturation value in the cell under study;
8.	Downhole pressure and flow rates of all wells;
9.	Indicators of oil, water production and water injection.
As a result, each cell will be associated with the same values of the parameters of the wells and all the production, which imposes an error in the given estimate in advance. It is unlikely that a universal neural network regression connection with the above parameters will be found for all cells. However, it is assumed that a normal distribution should be obtained, where for most cells, development indicators will be provided.
The method of estimating the efficiency of neural networks will be made through the implementation of a multitude of networks with a diverse architecture that varies due to the number of neurons in the hidden layer, as well as activating functions in the hidden and output layer.
Neural network modeling will be realized due to the multilayer perceptron. The structural scheme of a multilayer perceptron with one hidden layer is shown in Fig. A multilayer neural network can create an arbitrary multidimensional function with an appropriate choice of the number of layers, the range of signal variation, and the weighting coefficients of the neurons. Approximation is achieved due to the alternate calculation of linear combinations and nonlinear transformations.
 
Figure 3.1 - Multilayer perceptron
MLP-networks have the following advantages: back propagation is one of the most effective algorithm for learning multi-layer neural networks. One of the most popular learning algorithms, with its help, numerous practical tasks have been solved and solved.
We can also highlight the shortcomings: the multicriteria optimization problem in the back propagation method is considered as a set of one-criterion ones - at each iteration there are changes in the values of the network parameters that improve the work with only one example of the training sample. This approach significantly reduces the speed of training. The classical method of backward propagation refers to algorithms with linear convergence. To increase the rate of convergence, it is necessary to use matrices of the second derivatives of the error function.
To implement the study, variability will be used that simulates uncertainty analysis. 10 variants of the numerical model of the formation will be created:
a.	basic,
b.	with an increased permeability of 10%,
c.	with an increased permeability of 50%,
d.	with an increased porosity of 10%,
e.	with an increased porosity of 25%,
f.	with a reduced porosity of 15%,
g.	with increased bottomhole pressure of producing wells by 20%,
h.	with increased bottomhole pressure of producing wells by 50%,
i.	with an increased bottomhole pressure of the injection wells by 20%,
j.	with decreased bottomhole pressure of the injection wells by 20%.
It is assumed that the sample, based on the first two calculation steps of each option, will be sufficiently diverse to solve the regression problem.

Results and Discussion
On the basis of the initial data, a petrophysical analysis, a log processing, and correlations with the core were made. Two characteristic zones of the reservoir were distinguished, the upper one - high permeable and the lower - low permeable. The geological model of the field section 5000õ5000ì contains 291000 cells.
The allocated zone with nine wells has both cells with high permeability, and with low. The allocated site has the sizes 14õ14õ12, 2352 cells, however only 663 active blocks.
All the variants described in the previous chapter were calculated in the selected zone.
The simulation results were extracted from the Eclipse program files and prepared for use with STATISTICA. The normalization of each parameter is used in order to prepare the data for training. Sampling was divided randomly as 70% train size, 15% test size and 15% validation size. 
150 different architectures of neural networks with MLP were launched. The best modeled architectures for MLP networks are presented in table 4.1.
Table 4.1 - The most effective MLP network architectures

Architecture	Training 	Test	Validation	Training error	Error function	Activation function of hidden layer	Activation function of output layer
MLP 58-56-22	0.914	0.904	0.902	0.40281	SOS	Exponential	Tanh
MLP 58-76-22	0.923	0.911	0.909	0.36947	SOS	Logistic	Tanh
MLP 58-69-22	0.922	0.910	0.907	0.37143	SOS	Logistic	Tanh
MLP 58-55-22	0.926	0.916	0.910	0.37020	SOS	Logistic	Tanh
MLP 58-93-22	0.913	0.903	0.899	0.40279	SOS	Logistic	Identity
MLP 58-95-22	0.924	0.912	0.910	0.37902	SOS	Exponential	Logistic
MLP 58-96-22	0.916	0.904	0.901	0.40778	SOS	Logistic	Exponential
MLP 58-88-22	0.925	0.913	0.909	0.359.15	SOS	Logistic	Tanh

The correlation coefficients between the target values and the output values were rather high. 
For further calculations, MLP network 58-56-22 was chosen with activation functions - exponential in the hidden layer and tangential in the output layer.
The forecast for the base case has the following results - Figures 4.2, 4.3 and 4.4. The predicted value was the average of all the values obtained.
Forecast of production in the considered time interval relative error has a trend to increase over time. The effect of accumulating the error manifests itself over time, at t8 the difference in oil production is slightly more than 11%.
The production of water in the period under consideration has a low value and the deviation of the model from the numerical values has a large influence on the value of the relative error, in the third step it is practically equal to 30%. But after that there is a trend of reducing the error due to the absolute increase in water production in the future.
 
Figure 4.2 - Forecast of oil production by surrogate proxy model
 
Figure 4.3 - Forecast of water production by surrogate proxy model
  
Figure 4.4 - Production well production forecast
Based on the results, it can be seen that this surrogate model is able to forecast the main parameters of development such as oil production, water extraction. Also, the proposed surrogate model is able to make a forecast for the production well rates. However, there is a deviation in the parameters of the calculated and predicted. In this case a strong deviation is fixed after the seventh calculation step. The tolerance deviation in 0.7 is no longer observed at the seventh calculation step.
Also, the model is able to reproduce the state of active cells. The results show that there is a deviation. This deviation can be explained by the accumulation of an error with time. A strong deviation is observed after the seventh calculated step.
Constructed surrogate proxy model on the base of numerical simulation of the section of Krapivinsk field has limited prediction windows. Within this time frame it is able to mimic the results of numerical simulation.

Conclusion

The results of the model's training and its forecasts have demonstrated, first of all, the feasibility of this idea - the replacement of numerical modeling by the information model. For whole vectors of various indicators, numbers close to the target were obtained. "Teaching with the teacher" plays a huge role in this case. The network, due to the training method, determined the weights for the neurons both input and hidden, the whole array was processed with a correlation of ~ 0.9.
The next conclusion is to determine the approximate capabilities of neural networks in this direction. The use of a neural network of a simple architecture such as MLP is capable, with tolerances, of making an oil production forecast in some confidence time window. In the late stages of calculation, an error accumulates, and another answer is justified. Anticipated solution of the problem is more complex architectures of neural networks, incl. Recurrent networks capable of taking into account the previous state of the neuron.
It should also be noted that MLP is not able to create a universal model for any cell to obtain all the necessary information, it is possible to evaluate only in combination with the values of the remaining cells, where a normal distribution of results is observed.
A positive moment is the time of the neural network: to obtain the result of the state of the hydrodynamic system, the next step requires fractions of a second in the confidence window specified above, this technique can find its application. It is also worth noting that the model is unlimited by the number of participating wells.
 BREAKS HERE
Well test analysis and interpretation in horizontal wells is associated with many difficulties, one of which being the cases where considered well and reservoir deviate from the ideal model.The aim of this paper is to study the pressure transient response in horizontal wells where the basic well test theory assumptions are not valid and give recommendations to well test analysis in these cases.
In the literature review, the basics of the well test analysis theory for the horizontal wells were reviewed. In particular, it contains the description of the ideal horizontal wellbore, reservoir and fluid model for which the analytical solutions were derived. Besides that, the typical flow regimes that can be observed in the horizontal wellbore, as well as the typical shape of diagnostic plot are demonstrated. The Interpretation Process section contains the parameters that can be estimated from the basic flow regimes. Additionally, the cases where the assumptions made for the horizontal well model are violated were studied, and the consequences of this violation are analyzed.
Furthermore, the well test numerical simulation approach was employed in order to investigate how the geological conditions influence the pressure response, and, consequently, the well test interpretation process. For that purpose the sector model was built, which was further used as a framework for the construction of geological models that reflect simplified reservoir bodies. The Numerical Simulation Approach chapter also contains the description of basic heterogeneities that are characteristic for the fluvial and shallow marine environment. These features are then used in the conduction of the pressure transient sensitivity analysis to the vertical and horizontal variation in the reservoir properties.
As a result, the set of type curves showing how the pressure response changes with particular type of the reservoir and heterogeneity was obtained. More specifically, each of the flow regimes in horizontal well is sensitive to the particular type of heterogeneity and most severe cases the pressure response is distorted in such a way that the flow regimes cannot be identified on the diagnostic plot and the consequent interpretation is not possible.
Finally, the recommendations for the well test analysis and interpretation were given. The accurate interpretation of horizontal well test can only be achieved when the other sources of geological information (wireline logging data, special core analysis, etc.) are available and the external and internal morphology of the reservoir is taken into account.
Introduction
At the end of the 20th century horizontal drilling became the revolutionary approach of enhanced oil recovery and remains popular to the present time. Horizontal wells are high-angle wells with an inclination approximately equal to 90? to vertical which aim to enhance the reservoir performance by increased drainage area. Their advantages over vertical wells include increased productivity, lower fluid velocities around the wellbore, reduced pressure drop around the wellbore, and, as a consequence, reduced risk of water and gas coning. However, horizontal wells are much more technologically complex and expensive, requiring the application of sophisticated techniques for their drilling, completion, maintenance and testing.
The classical well test analysis assumptions, for which analytical solutions and interpretation techniques were derived, are rarely true for the real horizontal wells. This divergence can lead to the failure of conventional interpretation techniques to adequately describe the reservoir properties, therefore the effect of geological conditions and technical peculiarities of horizontal well operation and testing needs to be studied.
The aim of this paper is to study the pressure response in horizontal wells where the basic well test theory assumptions are not valid and give recommendations to well test analysis in these cases. To attain the aim successfully, following tasks are to be accomplished:
(i)	To study the techniques and assumptions of classical horizontal well test analysis theory;
(ii)	To examine whether the issue of assumptions violation for horizontal wells has arisen before and to find out the ways of solution proposed by other scientists;
(iii)	To investigate how the various geological scenarios influence the pressure response during horizontal well test by the method of numerical simulation;
(iv)	To conclude when the classical interpretation theory can or cannot be used and give recommendations for horizontal well test analysis.

Literature Review
Assumptions and Limitations. Figure 1.1 is a schematic of a horizontal well. The following assumptions are made:
(i)	The reservoir is horizontal, homogeneous, anisotropic (kx?ky?kz), and has constant horizontal, kH, and vertical, kV, permeabilities. It has thickness h, constant porosity ?, constant effective formation compressibility cf.
(ii)	The production occurs through a well of radius rw, represented in the model by a line-source located at distance zw from the lower boundary, the length of which is equal to that of the horizontal portion of the well, 2L.
(iii)	A single-phase fluid, of small and constant compressibility c, constant viscosity µ, and FVF B, flows from the reservoir to the well at a constant rate qw at surface and q at bottom hole conditions. Flow is laminar.
(iv)	The reservoir is bounded by upper and lower impermeable formations, and the pressure remains constant and equal to the initial value at an infinite distance from well.
(v)	Small pressure gradients are assumed, and wellbore-storage effects are not included to simplify the solution. Gravitational effects are negligible [4].
(vi)	The well is considered to be a line source. Two boundary conditions on the well surface are considered – infinite-conductivity and uniform-flux along the horizontal section.
Flow Regimes in Horizontal Wellbore. For the case of a horizontal well in a homogeneous, infinite-acting reservoir three main flow regimes exist (Figure 1.2). These are:
(i)	Early-time radial flow (vertical);
(ii)	Early-time linear flow opposite the completed section;
(iii)	Pseudoradial flow at late time.
Other flow regimes can also occur in special circumstances, e.g.:
(iv)	Hemiradial flow – when the well is very close to the formation top or bottom;
(v)	Spherical flow – only occurs when horizontal section length is less than formation thickness;
(vi)	Reservoir late-time linear flow – when the well is in a channel reservoir with width larger than horizontal section length [2].
Initially, as the well is put on production, a radial flow develops in the vertical plane perpendicular to the well. The well acts as though it is a vertical well turned sideways in a laterally infinite reservoir with thickness L. This flow period ends when the effect of the top or bottom boundary is felt or when flow across the well tip affects pressure response. If the well length is sufficiently long compared with reservoir thickness, a linear flow period may exist. In a sufficiently large reservoir, pseudo-radial flow will develop eventually. After pseudo-radial flow it is possible to develop late-time linear flow, if the reservoir has lateral boundaries [3]. If the horizontal well is located asymmetrically within those lateral boundaries, and one of the boundaries will be reached more rapidly, hemiradial flow may develop. If the production lasts long enough, pseudo-steady state or steady-state may be reached, depending upon the boundary condition.
Typical pressure derivative response for main flow regimes is shown on the Figure 1.3. The possible transient flow regimes in horizontal well, leading to pseudo steady state flow may be identified by:
?	A zero-slope line for early radial flow;
?	A half slope line for early linear flow;
?	A zero-slope line for late pseudo-radial flow;
?	A half-slope line for late linear flow, and
?	A unit-slope line for pseudo steady state flow.
Horizontal Well Test Interpretation Process. Permeability, permeability anisotropy, mechanical skin factors, effective length, and the position of the well relative to formation top and bottom can be estimated by analyzing transient flow pressure data in the horizontal well [3].
Early-time radial flow. Initially, the flow is radial in the vertical plane perpendicular to the wellbore. During this flow regime horizontal section is equivalent to a fully open to flow vertical well in an infinite reservoir with thickness L. Wellbore pressure response during this flow period of a constant rate production (drawdown) is estimated by Equation 1.1:
                                                                                   (1.1)
Semilog plot of wellbore pressure pwf versus producing time t will be in a form of straight line with a slope calculated by Equation 1.2:
                                                                                                                                                        (1.2)
The equivalent permeability in a vertical plane around the wellbore is given by the Equation 1.3:
                                                                                                                                                 (1.3)
Rearrangement of the Equation 1.1 into Equation 1.4 allows an estimation of the skin factor s if early-time pressure response exhibits a straight line on the semilog plot:
                                                                                                            (1.4)
Thus, following parameters can be estimated during the early-time radial flow:
?	Skin factor due to formation damage s;
?	Equivalent permeability in vertical plane  ;
?	Vertical permeability kv (if permeability perpendicular to the wellbore ky is known);
?	Producing well length L (in areal isotropic reservoir where kx=ky=kh, if effective reservoir permeability   is known);
?	Effective reservoir permeability keff (if producing well length is known).
However, this flow regime can be short and may be difficult to identify in reality due to wellbore storage effect. In addition, the radial character of flow may become distorted by the gravitational effects that were neglected [9]. Physically, this flow period ends when the effect of the top or bottom boundary is felt or when the flow across the well tops affects pressure response.
Early-time linear flow. If the horizontal well is sufficiently long in comparison to the formation thickness and the contribution to the well flow from its heel and toe is negligible, early-time linear flow may develop once the pressure transient reaches the upper and lower formation boundaries. Pressure response of well producing at a constant rate is estimated by Equation 1.5:
                                                                                     (1.5)
where sz is the pseudo-skin factor due to partial penetration in the vertical direction, and can be calculated by Equation 1.6:
                                                                                                (1.6)
Plot of ?p=pi-pwf versus  will exhibit a straight line of a slope given by Equation 1.7:
                                                                                                                                          (1.7)
A product of effective well length square L2 and permeability ky can be estimated from this slope. If the assumption of the drilled length being equal to a producing length is made, permeability ky can be obtained. Additionally, extrapolation of the straight line to   gives
                                                                                                                                     (1.8)
If pseudo-skin factor due to partial penetration sz (Equation 1.6) is known, mechanical skin-factor s can be obtained, with the assumption that the drilled length L is also an effective length.
Pseudo-radial flow period. If the well length is short enough in comparison to the reservoir size, pseudo-radial flow may be observed at late times. The flow period ends when the pressure transient response reaches one of the outer reservoir boundaries.
Pressure response during pseudo-radial flow period is describes by Equation 1.9:
                                                                       (1.9)
Plotting pwf versus t on semilog plot will exhibit a straight line of slope m3 given by 1.10: 
                                                                                                                                                    (1.10)
The equivalent horizontal permeability  can be estimated as
                                                                                                                                   (1.11)
Damage skin factor can be calculated by Equation 1.12:
                                                                                     (1.12)
where p1h is obtained by extrapolation of the pseudo-radial flow semilog straight line to t=1 hour. 
If the formation top or bottom boundary are constant pressure boundaries (with gas cap or artesian aquifer) then the period of pseudo-radial flow regime will not be observed, and steady-state flow at the late times will develop instead.
The Review of Well Test Assumptions Violation Literature. The complexity of horizontal well test in comparison to vertical have been discussed by many authors, and such reasons as dependence of interpretation results not only on the reservoir properties, but also the well geometry and orientation have been mentioned [22]. Specifically, according to J. Lee et al. [7], the number of factors can affect the pressure response in the horizontal well, including the following:
?	Horizontal permeability (perpendicular and parallel to the wellbore);
?	Vertical permeability;
?	Damage due to drilling;
?	Producing interval that effectively may be much less than drilled length;
?	Curvaceous horizontal section trajectory.
Taking into account the previously mentioned assumptions (Section 1.1) and comparing the horizontal well model used in conventional well test analysis to the real horizontal wells, the discrepancies in theoretical and actual pressure response can be expected to occur.
In particular, to obtain results from a type curve match, one has to assume that drilled wellbore length L is equal to the producing length Lw, which is rarely true in reality due to reservoir heterogeneities and/or drilling errors. Thus, changing L would change dimensionless well length LD and dimensionless wellbore radius rwD, resulting in generating different type curves for different rwD values to match the pressure response. This issue was discussed by several authors, including S. Joshi [3] and D. Bourdet [21]. 
For instance, S. Joshi [3] observed that horizontal well test may be difficult to analyze due to unrealistic assumptions of horizontal wells being perfectly horizontal and parallel to the top and the bottom of the formation, while realistic well profiles are more snake-like than straight. This may lead to the situation where one section of the well will see the reservoir boundary earlier than the remaining wellbore sections. All of these variations along the well length affect a pressure gauge inserted at the producing end of a horizontal well. However, the influence of these variations along the well length on the pressure response seems to be poorly explored.
What is more, the identification of effective producing horizontal length appears to be rather complicated due to combination of negative (increased drainage area) and positive skin-factors (formation damage, partial penetration and completion design). Except for the early flow period, the analysis of all other periods provides effective skin factor, and if part of the horizontal wellbore intersects an unproductive interval, it will also appear as a positive skin-factor.
Taking everything into consideration, the violation of classical horizontal well test analysis assumptions can be attributed either to geological conditions of the reservoir formation, or to technical peculiarities of horizontal well operation and testing.
Several authors including G. Massonat [14], A. Mijinyawa [15] and J. Zambrano [16] underlined the mutually dependent nature of geology and well test relationship. However, as J. Walsh [17] notes, available analytical well test solutions tend to reduce complex reservoir architectures to simplified geobodies. This simplification dictates the need to incorporate more complex geometries into well test analysis. In particular, A. Mijinyawa [15] analyzed the application of available simple well test interpretation models on complex reservoir geometries (for vertical well) using numerical well testing approach and concluded that while such complex features as meandering channel and a semi-infinite channel with non-parallel boundaries yield characteristic behaviors in a well test, they can be analyzed as a combination of simpler behaviors. J. Zambrano et al. [16] defined twelve basic generic-type objects with simplified geometries, aiming at providing models suitable for vertical well test analysis while being geologically realistic. Thus, while geology influence on pressure response during vertical well testing seems to be relatively thoroughly studied, commonly with the numerical well test approach, the lack of such research concerning horizontal well test signatures can be observed.
Assumption of horizontal well drilled in homogeneous formation is rarely observed in reality, often violated by vertical variations of formation properties as well as irregular shale distribution. As some of the conducted researches showed [25], multi-layer systems cannot be treated as equivalent single-layer systems. To account for these heterogeneities F. J. Kuchuk and T. Habashy [26] presented the analytic solution for pressure transient response of horizontal wells in layered reservoirs with formation cross flow. However, they also discovered that conventional well test analysis techniques such as Horner method may not work for layered systems with horizontal wells.
Technical issues of horizontal well testing can also have a significant influence on measured pressure distribution in the wellbore. In particular, pressure gauge is typically installed in the vertical section of the well, which leads to its failure in recognizing specific wellbore and formation conditions. F. Kuchuk [12] noted that it is practically impossible to know how these wellbore and formation conditions will influence the pressure transient in advance, and, consequently, an unknown large skin and variable wellbore storage may dominate a buildup pressure for the entire testing period, which will be discovered only after the test was conducted, rendering it useless.
One of the wellbore effects that are difficult to predict is wellbore storage, which is defined immediately after a .production start-up or shut-in, when the pressure behavior at early times is dominated by the compressibility and volume of the wellbore fluid. Joshi [3] noted that there are no available methods to estimate the time for the wellbore storage to end in horizontal wells precisely. Moreover, he underlines that the wellbore storage may last longer than the early radial flow period, affecting also the pressure response of the early time linear flow. According to Deruyck et al. [6], wellbore storage effect is more severe in horizontal than in vertical wells, which can be attributed to the increased wellbore volume (horizontal section can extend up to hundreds of meters). 
As indicated by several sources [23], wellbore storage can be reduced by the bottom hole shut-in, but it does not exclude the effect completely.  Alternatively, the successful attempt of the creation of numerical model that includes wellbore storage effect and allows eliminating the necessity of downhole shut-in has been made [24].
As was mentioned above, horizontal wells are rarely truly horizontal and often have a “snake-like” trajectory with multiple troughs and crests. According to Iskandar [8], non-linear trajectories of horizontal wells cause the multiphase flow in the wellbore to become more complex due to separation of the phases based on density differences. He also mentions that expansion of high compressibility gas phase with pressure decrease increases the volumetric flow rate of the gas and in turn the gas velocity, which may lead to dramatically vast changes in the flow pattern over the horizontal section due to increase or decrease of fluid velocity.
C. Lenn [13] noted that when gas is present in the reservoir, there are two major flow regimes that can be encountered in horizontal wells: when deviation is less than 90? (upflow) the gas usually flows as slugs; when deviation is more than 90? (downflow), stratified flow tends to occur with gas, oil and water flowing over each other at different speeds.
According to F. Kuchuk [11], for naturally flowing wells, gas presence in the wellbore makes the compressibility vary, producing a variable wellbore storage condition in the wellbore. The pressure gauge could therefore experience a multiphase fluid flow, while the fluid flow in the formation is single phase. As a consequence, phase segregation phenomenon can create considerable humps in the wellbore pressure and discontinuities in derivatives. 
The issue of non-uniform flux to horizontal wells has been thoroughly studied by many authors, and such reasons as reservoir heterogeneity, layering, heel-toe effect and completion design have been mentioned.
 In particular, T. Yildiz and E. Ozkan [20] investigated pressure response in selectively completed horizontal wells and observed that conventional analytical model with its assumptions and limitations failed to adequately describe pressure response in horizontal wells with selective completion. Moreover, in this case log-log diagnostic plot may show intermediate time radial flow period, which is not typically observed for horizontal wells with open hole or slotted liner completions.
Application of Inflow Control Devices is considered to be one of the most effective measures for inflow profile modification, but its influence on pressure response and, consequently, well test interpretation remains quite ambiguous. 
B.D. Poe Jr. and A. Erkal [19] in their study of transient response of horizontal wells with ICD completion noticed the effect of ICD nozzle sizes, their number and spatial variation along the wellbore on the pressure and the inflow profile. They indicated that the proper design of ICD completion with smaller ICD nozzles at the heel and progressively larger nozzles to the toe results in more even pressure drawdown along the horizontal section. Moreover, as they observed, the early pressure response is significantly influenced by the length of selectively-completed horizontal interval relative to the drilled length, with larger pressure drawdown being imposed on smaller completed interval, and vice versa. 
Recently, E. Nikjoo et al. [18] studied the possibility of the alteration of the classical PTA response due to extra non-linear pressure drop created by the ICD completion and came to the conclusion that in case of considerable zonal flow rate variation (during drawdown) or variable ICD diameter along the completion the pressure measured downstream is affected and pressure and derivative plots may become distorted resulting in inaccurate skin and permeability estimation by classical PTA methods. However, they note that during buildup, when flow rate does not change, conventional PTA method can be used. 
Taking everything into consideration, while there were numerous attempts to study the influence of basic assumptions violation on horizontal well test analysis in the past, this subject seems to remain quite disputable and requires further investigation. The numerical well test approach, similar to those utilized in articles [15] and [16] for vertical wells is planned to be conducted for horizontal wells in this paper in the following sections.
 Numerical Simulation Approach
In order to examine the early, middle and late time pressure response in reservoirs with various shapes and heterogeneities, a three-step approach, similar to that described by A. Mijinyawa and A.C. Gringarten [15] was employed. First, numerical simulation model that describes typical horizontal well and the reservoir that were discussed in the Section 1.1 was constructed in order to obtain typical pressure derivative diagnostic plot and compare the interpretation results of the obtained pressure response to the input simulation model parameters. After that, geological models and corresponding numerical simulation models which reflect simplified geometries of typical sand bodies were constructed to monitor the influence of the reservoir shape on the pressure response. Finally, the parameters within the simplified models of sand bodies were varied to study the sensitivity of the pressure response.
Base Case Model. The numerical model for the base case was generated by Petrel-2015 Software Platform and simulation was performed using Eclipse 100 from Schlumberger. The dynamic pressure response was obtained with a uniform Cartesian 3D grid and the local grid refinement around the horizontal section of the well. LGR was performed in order to simulate the near-well effects accurately, reducing the numerical dispersion effects. 
A constant rate drawdown was simulated on the numerical model with the following dimensions: 3000 m in X-direction, 3000 m in Y-direction and 50 m in Z-direction (120 x 120 x 50 cells correspondingly), in which case total cell number amounted to 720000 (Figure 2.1). When Cartesian LGR around the horizontal section was performed, this number increased to the value of 1022400 cells, with 302400 cells belonging to the local grid. The model consists of one facies – reservoir quality sandstone. Horizontal well is located in the center of the box-shaped reservoir with the horizontal section length equal to 600 m and angle of deviation from vertical 90?. Only horizontal section is fully perforated (Figure 2.2). The fluid model was chosen to be the dead oil with constant compressibility. In accordance with the ideal horizontal well model, described in the Section 1.1, the porosity for the base case was set to be uniform all over the reservoir and equal to 20%. The permeability was set to be anisotropic, but constant in X, Y and Z directions, with the value of 100 mD in X-direction, 75 mD in Y direction and 25 mD in Z direction. The diagnostic log-log plot of the resultant pressure response with observed flow regimes is presented in the Figure 2.3. It should be noted that the final section of the graph corresponds to the semi-steady state that in this particular case is observed due to the limits of the sector. It is also worth mentioning that the real well tests do not last for such a long time.
After that, to check the validity of constructed simulation model, the obtained pressure transient response was analyzed using conventional interpretation techniques. The results of the interpretation, as well as its comparison with input simulation model parameters showed that the divergence of the model input data and interpretation parameters is insignificant, therefore simulation model that is true to the basic well test theory assumptions can be analyzed by the conventional well test interpretation technique with high accuracy. 
Geological Modelling. Oil and gas reservoirs can occur in various shapes and dimensions, which are influenced by the geological conditions that were dominated during the sediment deposition, compaction and burial, as well as tectonic processes such as faulting and folding. These factors can lead to formation of such geological features as pinch-outs, facies substitution and non-parallel reservoir boundaries.
To study the pressure response 3D geological models with various reservoir geometries were constructed in Petrel-2015 Software Platform using the object modelling in order to produce the exact shapes. The geological models have dimensions 3000 m by 3000 m by 50 m. sector dimensions, LGR, rock and fluid properties as well as horizontal well length and position in the sector are as those in the base case and remain constant in all the simulations runs. The size of the cell grid was selected in the way that allows to capture sand bodies geometry and avoid long running time of the consequent simulation. The properties of the two facies – sand and shale – for the base case model are presented in the Table 1.
Table 1 Base case model facies and their properties
Facies	Reservoir	Non-reservoir
Description	Sand	Shale
Porosity, fraction	0.2	0.2
Horizontal permeability kx, mD	100	0.01
Vertical permeability kz, mD	0.25*kx	0.25*kx
To investigate the geology influence on the transient pressure response in horizontal wells the simplified reservoir shapes were built. 
Sensitivity Workflow. Fluvial deposits. Channel deposits refer to the sand, silt and clay filling the valleys that were cut by a river system (Figure 2.3). Channel fill sandstones can are long and narrow bodies that can be successfully targeted by the horizontal wells (Figure 2.3). As was mentioned above, several researches studied the dynamic pressure response in the fluvial channel reservoirs penetrated by vertical wells [15], [17], [30]. The important parameter of the fluvial deposits is the reservoir connectivity. There are following categories of the reservoir connectivity: association of architectural elements, stacking pattern of channel elements (Figure 2.6), and net sand content. Moreover, permeability heterogeneity of the fluvial systems can influence the transient pressure response significantly.
According to P. Carling [31], the direction of the maximum permeability in fluvial sand bodies is typically parallel to the axis of the small troughs, while minimum permeability is perpendicular to the trough axis, varying to the value of up to 90% of maximum. All in all, a systematic decrease in permeability both downwards and backwards can be observed (Figure 2.7). This trend reflects the variation in grain size and the proportion of the clay within the channel sediment. The other data shows that in fluvial channels highest permeability is observed in the central two-thirds of a particular sand body, and is progressively lower at the sand body margins [32]. The varied parameters as well as extent of their variation are presented in the Figure 2.8. 
Shallow marine deposits. The dominant physical processes of the shallow marine environment are wave and storm action, tidal and fluvial currents. The sand bodies formed in this environment are characterized by the set of specific features, which serve as indicators of this particular depositional environment. In particular, they tend to be laterally continuous, with cross-bedding (strong currents), hummocky and swaley cross-stratification (storm action). Another characteristic feature is the presence of marine fossils, which are especially abundant in shelf deposits. The commonly occurring feature of the shallow marine environment is a tight sand, which is a carbonized sandstone formed by the secondary depositional processes. Tight sand has the poor reservoir quality and frequently acts as a barrier to the fluid flow in the formation, causing non-uniform flux to the horizontal wellbore.
The results of the conducted sensitivity analysis are presented in the following section.
Results and Discussion
Fluvial deposits. Effect of channel content. Channel fraction was increased from 20% to 100% with 20 % increment (Figure 3.1-3.2). 
The variation in channel fraction reflects the degree of lateral connectivity, creating different configurations of channel geometry – isolated, stacked, amalgamated (Figure 2.6). Moreover, the increase in channel content indicates better pressure communication within the reservoir – it can be seen in the Figure 3.3 that for the 100% channel fraction (which is equivalent to the base case) case three basic flow regimes can be identified clearly. However, this is not the case for the 20 % channel content – both early-time and late-time radial regimes can be hardly distinguished, making the identification of reservoir parameters very difficult. On the whole, with the increase of the channel fraction the flow derivative diagnostic plot becomes more easily recognized and earlier pressure stabilization can be observed.  
Effect of background facies permeability. The horizontal permeability of background shale facies is varied from 0.01 mD to 10 mD, while the permeability of the reservoir channel facies remains constant and equal to 100 mD. 
The results for various channel fractions are presented in the Figures 3.4-3.5. The diagnostic plots show that the permeability contrast between channel sandstone and the overbank shale is more significant for the low channel content, while for the high channel content (Figure 3.5) the pressure response does not change significantly, and the diagnostic plots for different values of overbank permeability overlay each other. The general trend is that the transient pressure response and, consequently, diagnostic feature in low channel fraction cases becomes more and more confusing with increased permeability contrast between facies. 
In particular, in cases where channel fraction is low and permeability contrast is high, such as Figure 3.3, the flow regimes are not so easily recognized, as the transitional flow dominates the derived pressure response. The decrease in permeability contrast extends the duration of the early-time radial flow. For the 90% channel content case the classical early-time radial, early-time radial and pseudo radial flow regimes on the can be clearly distinguished on the diagnostic plot.
The time to reach semi-steady state is relatively the same in all the cases and amounts to approximately 1000 hours.
Effect of areal permeability contrast. The horizontal permeability perpendicular to the wellbore and to the direction of sediment accumulation ky (major direction of the sand body) was varied from 10 to 100 mD, while the horizontal permeability parallel to the wellbore and to the direction of sediment accumulation kx remained constant and equal to 100 mD (Figure 3.6). The results of the simulation are shown on the figures 3.7-3.8.
As in the previous cases, the effect of permeability variation is more pronounced for low channel sand fraction. The early-time pressure response for different ky values is being affected, diverging from the base case significantly. This is reflected in the changing duration of the early-time radial flow, which is longer for the smaller areal permeability contrasts.
While being consistent at early and middle times, the pressure response for various kx values starts to diverge at late times, in some cases completely masking the second radial flow regime. As a result, the flow regimes can be identified distinctly for the relatively high channel content (50-90%) with horizontal permeability contrast (both kx and ky equal to 100 mD).
Effect of internal permeability heterogeneity. In fluvial channels highest permeability is observed in the central two-thirds of a particular sand body, and is progressively lower at the sand body margins (Figure 3.9) [32], therefore for this case such internal permeability variation was considered. The results of the simulation are presented on the Figure 3.10.
Conclusion. In low channel content cases, where lateral compartmentalization occurs, effective wellbore length is not equal to the drilled length, causing the non-uniform flux to the wellbore. As a result, individual channel bodies fail to intersect, affecting the pressure response, distorting the diagnostic plot and in some severe cases making the flow regimes unidentifiable. The effect of low channel content is aggravated by increased permeability heterogeneity, both between facies and internal permeability within the channel body. 
Shallow Marine Depositional Environment. Effect of non-uniform tight sand distribution. As was mentioned in the previous chapter, the irregular tight sand distribution is a characteristic feature of the shallow marine sediments (Figure 3.11). This fenomenon is typically the result of the secondary depositional processes, in it is usually distributed in the otherwise qood quality reservoirs quite randomly. The degree of tightness (or carbonatization) can vary, therefore to study the effect, the different permeabilities of the tight sand were taken into account. The results are presented in the Figure 3.12. 
It can be seen that in case of low permeability of the tight sand, the early-time regimes are mostly affected. Since the effective well length is much less than the drilled length, the duration of linear floe regime is reduced. The second radial regime mostly remains unaffected. Such effects can be attributed to the fact that while the tight sand layers create a barrier for the fluid flow, overall pressure communication of the system is still sufficient.
Effect of interlayering. Shallow marine deposits are also characterized by non-uniform interlayering of the sandstone, siltstone, and mudstone (Figure 3.13). The results of the simulation are presented in the Figure 3.14.
The obtained with the help of numerical simulation log-log plot demonstrate that in case of the high permeability contrast of the layers the classical flow regimes are completely distorted, therefore no interpretation is possible. This effect can be attributed to the reduced vertical permeability.
Recommendations
To improve the quality of the well test interpretation results following measures can be considered:
1.	Reduction of the interference effect from the nearby wells, which can be achieved by the nearby wells shut-in. This will allow defining the slope of the line that corresponds to the radial flow and estimate the kh value more accurately. However, one should consider whether this method is justified economically as opposed to the loss of the hydrocarbons which could be recovered during the nearby wells shut-in. The alternative is to achieve a stable (constant rate) production from nearby wells some time before the research.
2.	More accurate estimation of the effective horizontal length from the wireline logging data. The derivation of this value will allow the estimation of the permeability and the average net pay thickness in the region of the horizontal wellbore. To define the sections of the horizontal well which penetrate the permeable rocks, it can be recommended to conduct Neutron and Sonic logging in the suite with the Gamma Ray logging. Running the production logging should also be considered. The proposed logging suite will allow obtaining more accurate estimation of the effective well length, which, in turn, will help in determination of the reservoir thickness and permeability.
3.	Comprehensive analysis of the geological heterogeneity in three dimensions is required to evaluate possible pressure barriers and their influence of the pressure derivative.

Conclusions
In this paper the influence of geological heterogeneities on well test interpretation in horizontal wells was investigated. As a result, the set of type curves reflecting various geological heterogeneities for fluvial and shallow marine depositional environment was obtained. During the research it was establidhed that the most influential parameters for the pressure transient response are vertical and lateral permeability variation, areal permeability anisotropy and internal heterogeneity of the reservoir sandbodies. Using the well test data in conjunction with the other sources of information about the subsurface geology is the correct way should be the priority of the well test interpretators.
All things considered, the comprehensive analysis of vertical and lateral reservoir heterogeneities is required to improve the quality of the well test interpetation in horizontal wells.
 
 

